Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

Available online 30 July 2022
0308-521X/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Identifying exemplary sustainable cropping systems using a positive 
deviance approach: Wheat-maize double cropping in the North China Plain

Zhengyuan Liang a,b,c,*, Wopke van der Werf c, Zhan Xu b,c, Jiali Cheng a,b,c, Chong Wang b, 
Wen-Feng Cong b,**, Chaochun Zhang b, Fusuo Zhang b, Jeroen C.J. Groot a

a Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700, AK, Wageningen, the Netherlands 
b College of Resources and Environmental Science, National Academy of Agriculture Green Development, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China 
c Centre for Crop Systems Analysis, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700, AK, Wageningen, the Netherlands

H I G H L I G H T S  
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T

• A positive deviance approach was used 
to identify exemplary sustainable crop­
ping systems. 
• Exemplary 
wheat-maize 
systems 
reached the best compromise across 
seven indicators. 
• Exemplary wheat-maize systems were 
supported by several efficient practices 
but not farming contexts. 
• Sustainability gaps could be closed if 
local wheat-maize systems resembled 
exemplary ones. 
• The positive deviance approach is a 
promising way to inform sustainability 
improvement of cropping systems.

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Editor: Guillaume Martin

Keywords: 
Hierarchical clustering 
Pareto ranking 
Dietary energy yield 
Gross margin 
Nitrogen loss 
Groundwater depletion

A B S T R A C T

CONTEXT: Sustainable cropping systems need to balance productivity and profitability with resource and 
environmental conservation. Within a population of cropping system observations, there might be positive de­
viants that outperform others in terms of sustainability, which could serve as “model systems” for future 
development. Wheat-maize double cropping is the dominant system in the North China Plain, which is facing 
multiple economic, societal, and environmental sustainability challenges. Identifying exemplary positive de­
viants out of a multitude of wheat-maize observations might provide solutions to enhance overall sustainability. 
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to 1) identify exemplary wheat-maize systems that reached optimal performance across 
seven sustainability indicators, 2) determine which factors regarding management practices and farming con­
texts resulted in the sustainability gaps between exemplary and other systems, and 3) propose a sustainable 
wheat-maize prototype. 
METHODS: Based on a farmer survey dataset (n = 344), we developed a cropping system-level positive deviance 
approach, including multi-criteria assessment, positive deviant identification (Pareto ranking) and positive

Abbreviations: NCP, North China Plain; N, Nitrogen; GHG, Greenhouse gas; C, Carbon; MIDIP, Multi-indicator distance to the ideal point; HDIP, Heterogeneity of 
distances to the ideal point across the indicator set. 
* Corresponding author at: Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700, AK, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 
** Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: zhengyuan.liang@wur.nl (Z. Liang), wenfeng.cong@cau.edu.cn (W.-F. Cong).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Agricultural Systems

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103471 
Received 24 May 2022; Received in revised form 20 July 2022; Accepted 22 July 2022

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

2

deviant clustering, to identify exemplary wheat-maize systems. We then compared exemplary and other systems 
to quantify the sustainability gaps and identify the key variables explaining sustainability gaps. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Sixteen percent of wheat-maize cases were Pareto-optimal and were classified as 
positive deviants. These were sorted into seven clusters representing contrasting sustainability patterns. Among 
these clusters, one comprised exemplary systems due to the best compromise over the indicator set. Compared to 
remaining wheat-maize cases, exemplary systems, on average, resulted in 49% and 17% higher gross margin and 
dietary energy output, respectively, and 33–51% lower labor use, groundwater depletion, N loss, net greenhouse 
gas emission, and pesticide use. Key practices conferring exemplary system performance included higher maize 
seeding density, lower fertilizer N input in wheat, partial substitution of inorganic fertilizer with manure, a 
smaller number of irrigation events, and a lower frequency of pesticide and herbicide application. No significant 
difference in farming context was found between exemplary and other systems. 
SIGNIFICANCE: Since the practices of exemplary systems were already locally adopted and proven, we expect 
that farmers in the region can increase the sustainability of their wheat-maize production by adjusting their 
management to resemble the exemplary systems. The positive deviance approach thus provides a pragmatic 
bottom-up approach to identify practices that can improve the sustainability of cropping systems, and can be 
used for other cropping systems elsewhere.

1. Introduction

With a growing world population and widespread agriculture- 
induced environmental harms, global crop production must meet joint 
sustainability demands regarding food security, resource conservation, 
environmental soundness, and socioeconomic viability (Foley et al., 
2011). Therefore, most agricultural regions on the globe need to explore 
suitable pathways to improve multi-dimensional sustainability of crop 
production (Lechenet et al., 2017; Spiegal et al., 2018; Davis et al., 
2019), although the challenges they face differ among regions (Zhang 
et al., 2021). 
The North China Plain (NCP) is the breadbasket of China, responsible 
for 59% and 26% of the national wheat and maize production, respec­
tively (National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC), 2020). Agriculture 
in this region has prioritized high productivity to support increasing 
domestic consumption in the past decades (Niu et al., 2021). The 
average grain yield increased from 2.0 to 6.4 Mg/ha for wheat (Triticum 
aestivum L.) and from 3.7 to 6.1 Mg/ha for maize (Zea mays L.) between 
1980 and 2019, with substantial increases in agricultural inputs, such as 
water, fertilizer, and pesticides (National Bureau of Statistics of China 
(NBSC), 2020). However, local cropping systems are currently facing a 
range of sustainability challenges from economic, societal, and envi­
ronmental perspectives. On the one hand, improving productivity and 
profitability are needed to ensure national food self-sufficiency and 
boost rural economic prosperity under the condition of rural labor 
shortage (Ghose, 2014; Xu et al., 2019). On the other hand, due to 
intensive crop management by smallholders, crop production has been a 
major force behind local environmental deterioration. The NCP is 
suffering from severe groundwater table decline (at a rate of 1 m per 
year; Kong et al., 2016), fertilizer nitrogen (N)-related water and at­
mospheric pollution (Meng et al., 2018a; Wang et al., 2019), high 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Xu and Lan, 2017), as well as pesticide 
contamination of soil and water (Brauns et al., 2018). All challenges are 
pressing, and thus local cropping systems need to pursue multi- 
dimensional sustainability. 
Double cropping of wheat and maize is the largest cropping system, 
covering around 60% of the total arable land area in the NCP (Li and Lei, 
2021). Improving multi-dimensional sustainability of the wheat-maize 
system would therefore make a great contribution to enhancing 
farming sustainability in this region. There is indeed a huge potential to 
improve the sustainability of wheat-maize systems. For instance, many 
field trials in the NCP have proven that the N loss, GHG emissions, or 
groundwater table decline could be decreased without sacrificing grain 
output through optimized management techniques such as fertilization 
based on soil testing, enhanced-efficiency fertilizers, and advanced 
irrigation regimes (Ju et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2020). 
However, most of those studies considered only a few aspects of sus­
tainability, intentionally or unintentionally overlooking other aspects

and possible trade-offs. 
It is difficult for researchers to give pragmatic solutions to enhance 
all domains of the sustainability performance of cropping systems based 
on a “top-down” approach. That is because trade-offs between sustain­
ability domains usually occur in agricultural systems (Kanter et al., 
2018; Li et al., 2019) and challenges concern multiple disciplines. 
Moreover, those solutions may not fit the site-specific conditions, thus 
being not locally viable for farmers (Liu et al., 2018). So far, a holistic 
sustainability assessment of wheat-maize systems in the NCP is lacking, 
and it remains unclear how local farmers could reconcile the different 
domains of sustainability in wheat and maize production. 
Cropping systems within an agricultural region tend to have heter­
ogenous agronomic, environmental as well as socioeconomic perfor­
mance as a result of varying cultivation practices and different 
production contexts across farmers (Aouadi et al., 2015). Identifying the 
existing cropping systems that are cultivated sustainably from the 
multitude of observations might provide a suitable example for wider 
application. 
The positive deviance approach can be used to investigate the 
characteristics and practices of the best performing individuals (i.e., 
positive deviants) within a population (Herington and van de Fliert, 
2018). Here, positive deviants refer to the cases achieving superior 
performance compared to others within a community despite sharing 
similar environment, resources, and barriers. The positive deviance 
approach was initiated and widely applied in the field of human nutri­
tion and public health (Albanna and Heeks, 2019), for example, to 
propose dietary interventions against child malnutrition through 
studying positive deviant households with healthier children under 
given resource-poor circumstances. This approach was also extended to 
the agricultural domain to look into positive deviant farms and the 
practices driving them (Savikurki, 2013; Dumont et al., 2020). 
Recent studies on positive deviance of farming systems identified 
positive deviants in terms of multiple assessment indicators through 
systematic and quantitative methods, e.g., Pareto optimality (Modernel 
et al., 2018; Steinke et al., 2019; Adelhart Toorop et al., 2020). These 
studies also captured the diversity of positive deviants, and ruled out 
positive deviants that underperformed in certain indicators using 
benchmark values for each indicator. Benchmark values can be recog­
nized as threshold values (Modernel et al., 2018) or the population mean 
could also be used as a benchmark (Adelhart Toorop et al., 2020). 
However, the use of such benchmarks is to some extent arbitrary, and it 
would be interesting to pursue an approach to select positive deviants 
that is benchmark-free. Besides, most of the agriculture-oriented studies 
focused on the farm scale, while cropping system-level positive deviance 
analysis to inform multifaceted sustainability improvement of crop 
production is still understudied. 
In this study, we hypothesized that within a population of wheat- 
maize double cropping cases, there are likely to be exemplary positive

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

3

deviants that could reach comparatively superior and well-balanced 
performance across all sustainability domains, supported by a set of 
efficient management practices and possibly also by favorable farming 
contexts. Here we applied a nested positive deviance approach to wheat- 
maize observations within a county in the NCP. The research objectives 
were 1) to identify exemplary positive deviant wheat-maize systems 
without resorting to the use of benchmarks, 2) to identify whether multi- 
dimensional sustainability gaps between exemplary and other systems 
were due to differences in management or farming context, and 3) to 
propose a sustainable wheat-maize prototype based on exemplary 
systems.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Methodological framework for the nested positive deviance approach

We used a four-step methodological approach to identify positive 
deviants and exemplary cropping systems and to extract measures that 
improve the sustainability of cropping systems (Fig. 1). 
STEP 1: Data collection and multi-criteria assessment. 
A field survey was conducted to collect data regarding production 
input-output as well as the biophysical and socioeconomic context of 
cropping systems (see Section 2.3). Then we used the dataset to quantify 
cropping system-level performance in terms of indicators related to local 
sustainability challenges (see Section 2.4). 
STEP 2: Identification of positive deviants and exemplary systems. 
Positive deviants were identified by selecting Pareto-optimal crop­
ping systems (explained in Section 2.5.1) from the set based on indicator 
performance. Next, hierarchical clustering was used to divide all posi­
tive deviants into several clusters with contrasting sustainability pat­
terns. Subsequently, the positive deviant cluster with the shortest 
distance to the ideal point (see Section 2.5.2) was selected as the cluster 
containing those exemplary systems representing the best compromise 
across the whole indicator set.

STEP 3: Quantification and explanation of sustainability gaps. 
We compared sustainability indicators between exemplary and other 
systems to calculate multi-dimensional sustainability gaps. Then, we 
used a range of explanatory variables describing crop management, 
biophysical and socioeconomic context to analyze factors associated 
with sustainability gaps. 
STEP 4: Establishment of a sustainable cropping system prototype. 
Finally, based on the above three steps, a sustainable prototype was 
built, which summarizes and describes crop management and expected 
sustainability outcomes of exemplary systems. This locally viable pro­
totype could act as a model for local stakeholders on possibilities to 
advance the sustainability of wheat-maize production.

2.2. Study area description

Quzhou 
is 
a 
typical 
agricultural 
county 
in 
the 
NCP 
(114◦50′E–115◦13′E, 36◦35′N–36◦57′N, located in Hebei Province of 
China), and was chosen as the study area (Fig. S1). Its representativeness 
for crop production over the NCP can be summarized in the following 
points:

1) Pedo-climatic circumstances: Quzhou county has a warm-temperate 
and monsoonal climate that is typical for the NCP. The mean annual 
temperature is 13.1 ◦C with hot summers and cold winters, while the 
mean annual precipitation is 500 mm, 60% of which occurs from late 
June to late October. Agricultural soils are calcareous alluvial, 
characterized by loamy texture, high soil pH (> 7.5), and low soil 
organic matter content (< 2% in most croplands).  
2) Cropping patterns: Similar to most agricultural counties in the NCP, 
croplands in Quzhou are dominated by double cropping of wheat and 
maize, in which wheat is sown in October and harvested in June the 
next year while maize is sown immediately after wheat harvest in 
June and harvested in October. Most of the wheat-maize systems are 
managed by smallholders who have an average farm size of 0.6 ha.

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the nested steps in the methodological framework. Boxes outside the flow chart indicate the methods used in the corresponding steps. 
Margin, DEY, GWD, GHGn, and Pesti. denote gross margin, dietary energy yield, groundwater depletion, net GHG emission, and pesticide use respectively. MIDIP is 
the multi-indicator distance to the ideal point (see Section 2.5.2).

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

4

3) Sustainability challenges: Quzhou faces a variety of economic, soci­

etal, and environmental challenges that are characteristic for the 
NCP: low farming income, rural labor shortage, groundwater table 
decline, and high N loss (Zhang et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018; Meng 
et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2022). Besides, current agri-environmental 
policies aim to reduce the currently high use of pesticides and high 
emissions of GHG (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the 
People’s Republic of China (MARA), 2022).

2.3. Farm household survey and dataset establishment

In July 2020, we conducted a survey of 525 farming households in 
Quzhou. The survey was carried out in 25 villages, with 15 randomly 
selected households per village (Fig. S1). For each household, we 
interviewed the household head in person with a structured question­
naire to collect data on the household situation (e.g., labor availability), 
cultivated cropping systems (e.g., wheat-maize double cropping), and 
inputs and outputs (e.g., fertilizer use and yield) of each crop species in a 
one-year cropping cycle (June 2019 – June 2020). We found that 344 
households (66%) cultivated wheat-maize double cropping with irri­
gation from groundwater. Data associated with these wheat-maize ob­
servations, including a crop input-output inventory and household 
characteristics (Table S1), were extracted to build a new dataset for this 
study. We used the latest soil grid dataset of Quzhou (sampling in 2018; 
Li et al., 2022) to get averaged soil properties at the village level using 
the inverse distance weighted method in ArcMap 10.8 (https://www. 
esri.com/en-us/arcgis/products/arcgis-desktop). Eventually, we had a 
dataset containing variables on crop input, crop output, as well as the 
biophysical and socioeconomic context (i.e., soil properties and house­
hold characteristics) of all groundwater-irrigated wheat-maize cases in 
Quzhou.

2.4. Multi-criteria assessment

In this study, sustainability indicators were selected accounting for 
local challenges to be tackled and can fall into three domains, i.e., 
economic, societal, and environmental aspects, of sustainability. The 
temporal scale of all indicators is a double-cropping cycle (one year).

2.4.1. Economic domain – Gross margin 
Maximizing the profitability of the cropping system is the major in­
terest of farmers. Here annual gross margin (GMtotal, USD/ha/year) was 
used to indicate the economic performance of each wheat-maize 
observation, and was calculated as follows:

GMtotal =
∑

i

Yi × PRi −VCi
(1)

where i (= wheat, maize) denotes crop species. Yi (Mg/ha) and PRi 
(USD/t) denote grain yield and farm gate price respectively. Variable 
costs (VCi, USD/ha/year) cover all costs of agricultural material inputs 
(including seed, fertilizer, manure, electricity, pesticides, and growth 
regulators) and hired machinery use (for tillage, sowing, harvesting, and 
straw return) based on their application rate or the number of applica­
tions and corresponding prices. Prices are listed in Table S2.

2.4.2. Societal domain

2.4.2.1. Dietary energy yield. Dietary energy yield (DEYtotal, GCal/ha/ 
year) is a widely-used proxy indicator for food provisioning capacity, 
which is associated with the societal demand for food security. Here, this 
indicator represents the summation of the energy output of wheat and 
maize, and was estimated based on Yi and dietary energy content (Ei, 
Gcal/Mg) of harvested commodities:

DEYtotal =
∑

i

Yi × Ei
(2)

where dietary energy content of wheat and maize grain was 3.17 and 
3.35 GCal/Mg, respectively (Yang et al., 2018).

2.4.2.2. Labor use. Given the increasing rural labor shortage in the 
NCP, labor input needs to be minimized in sustainable cropping systems. 
Here we summed up the time farmers spent on manual cropping activ­
ities for wheat-maize systems to quantify annual labor use (LUtotal, h/ 
ha/year), which was expressed as:

LUtotal =
∑

i

∑

j

Lj,i × Nj,i
(3)

where j (=1, 2, 3, …) represents a manual cropping activity including 
mineral fertilizer and manure application, pesticide and herbicide use, 
irrigation, weeding, and harvesting. Lj,i is labor time consumption for 
activity j, and Nj,i denotes the number of times the activity j was per­
formed during the growing season of crop species i. Because some 
farmers could not recall their labor inputs precisely and Lj,i was found to 
be relatively homogeneous among households, we used a fixed value for 
Lj,i (except for manure use and weeding), equal to the average of all 
households able to report it (Table S3).

2.4.3. Environmental domain

2.4.3.1. Groundwater 
depletion. Sustainable 
wheat-maize 
systems 
should contribute to mitigating groundwater table decline in the NCP. 
Groundwater depletion (GWD, mm/year) is a useful indicator to assess 
the sustainability of groundwater use at the cropping system level (Yang 
et al., 2021), and was defined as:

GWD =
∑

i

IRi −D
(4)

where IRi (mm) is the irrigation amount from groundwater for crop i, 
and D (mm/year) is the deep infiltration during a wheat-maize cropping 
year. Positive values of GWD reflect groundwater depletion, whereas 
negative values indicate groundwater recharge. IRi was estimated from 
the electricity consumption of water pumping using an empirical 
equation (Section 1.1 in the Supplemental Materials) while D was 
calculated as:

D = α ×

(

P +
∑

i

IRi

)

(5)

where P is annual precipitation (mm/year). α denotes the dimensionless 
recharge coefficient which was set as 0.2 calibrated for the case study 
area (Yang et al., 2021).

2.4.3.2. Nitrogen loss. Fertilizer nitrogen (N) that is lost to the envi­
ronment causes water eutrophication and PM2.5 (fine particle matters) 
pollution (Huang et al., 2017; Meng et al., 2018a). Therefore, N loss 
(NLtotal, kg N/ha/year) from wheat-maize croplands needs to be mini­
mized and was defined as:

NLtotal =
∑

i

(
NLNH3,i + NLNO3,i + NLN2O,i

)
(6)

where NLNH3,i, NLNO3,i, and NLN2O,i indicate the crop-specific amount of 
N (kg N/ha) lost via the pathways of ammonia volatilization, nitrate 
leaching, and nitrous oxide emission, respectively. These were calcu­
lated based on N fertilizer inputs using empirical equations calibrated 
for the NCP (Section 1.2 in the Supplemental Materials).

2.4.3.3. Net GHG emission. Carbon (C) emission abatement has been 
recognized as a key objective for crop production in China (Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (MARA), 
2022). Building on the idea of life cycle assessment, net GHG emission

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

5

was used to evaluate the system performance in combating global 
warming (International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 2006). 
The system boundary included manufacturing and transportation of 
agricultural inputs, cropping practices on farmland, and soil carbon 
stock change (including pre-and on-farm stage). Net GHG emission 
(GHGnet, Mg CO2 eq./ha/year) depends on GHG emission (GHGemi, Mg 
CO2 eq./ha/year) and soil C sequestration (QSOC, Mg CO2 eq./ha/year):

GHGnet = GHGemi −QSOC
(7)

where GHGemi accounts for pre-farm GHG emissions, N fertilizer- 
induced direct and indirect nitrous oxide emission, and soil C degrada­
tion, while QSOC considered C inputs from straw return, root residues, 
and animal manure. These were all quantified using empirical equations 
specified in Sections 1.3–1.4 of the Supplemental Materials.

2.4.3.4. Pesticide use. Less reliance on chemical pesticides is an 
important element of sustainable cropping systems. Pesticides included 
insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides in our research. Because it was 
difficult for farmers to report the exact product composition and active 
ingredients applied, we quantified the pesticide inputs based on the 
number of applications of a full dosage according to label recommen­
dation (usually a 20 L tank of knapsack sprayer per mu, 1/15 ha, one 
tank as one dose). Thus, pesticide use (PUtotal, doses/year) was calcu­
lated as:

PUtotal = IUtotal + HUtotal + FUtotal
(8)

where IUtotal, HUtotal, and FUtotal indicate insecticide use, herbicide use, 
and fungicide use in a one-year cropping cycle (all expressed in doses/ 
year), respectively. The calculation is further elaborated in Section 1.5 
of the Supplemental Materials.

2.5. Identification of positive deviants and exemplary systems

This step aims to select exemplary systems out of all wheat-maize 
observations in Quzhou in terms of the above sustainability indicators, 
which can be regarded as the “model” for sustainable wheat-maize 
production (Fig. 2).

2.5.1. Pareto ranking-based selection 
Pareto ranking is a method that can find out well-performing in­
dividuals, also known as Pareto-optimality, from the whole population 
without assigning subjective weights to multiple indicators (Groot and 
Rossing, 2011). Here we used Pareto rank as a criterion to identify 
positive deviants among wheat-maize cases, in terms of seven sustain­
ability indicators (Fig. 1). During the ranking process, cases were ranked 
as “1” (i.e., Pareto-optimal or non-dominated) when they are not inferior 
than any other case for all indicators (Groot et al., 2012). The Pareto 
ranking was performed by using pareto_rank function from R package 
“eaf”. In this study, we treated Pareto-rank-1 cases as positive deviants, 
while the remaining systems were referred to as dominated systems.

2.5.2. Clustering- and distance-based selection 
In the set of positive deviants, there might be extreme cases that 
excelled at certain indicators but still performed relatively poorly in 
other indicators, in case strong trade-offs among indicators exist 
(Adelhart Toorop et al., 2020). When facing multiple challenges without 
predefined priority, we need to identify the positive deviants that reach 
an acceptable compromise across the whole indicator set. Such positive 
deviants were denoted as “exemplary systems”, while the rest of the 
positive deviants and all dominated systems together as “other systems”. 
An additional method is needed to identify exemplary systems. 
We applied a hierarchical clustering method, with seven normalized 
indicators being response variables, to partition all positive deviants into 
several clusters with contrasting characteristics of sustainability per­
formance. This clustering method used Manhattan distance, which is not 
sensitive to outliers, to measure dissimilarities among cases, and used 
the “Ward.D2” linkage approach to minimize the intra-cluster dissimi­
larities (Kassambara, 2017). We conducted the clustering using the 
function hclust in R software. The decision on the number of clusters 
should be made to keep intra-cluster variation in indicator performance 
small enough, which enabled each of the clusters to be treated as a 
cropping system group with a certain sustainability pattern. Here, we 
made an elbow plot using function fviz_nbclust, and determined the 
number of clusters based on the position of the bend of the elbow plot. 
Then positive deviants were assigned to the clusters using function 
cutree. 
Subsequently, to evaluate the degree of compromise across in­
dicators, two metrics were applied for each positive deviant cluster: 
multi-indicator distance to the ideal point (MIDIP) and heterogeneity of 
distances to the ideal point across the indicator set (HDIP). The ideal 
point was defined as a point in performance space with coordinates that 
are for each indicator equal to the best observed indicator value in the 
population of observations. MIDIP was defined as the range-scaled 
Euclidean distance from the centroid of a given cluster to the ideal 
point. We then defined the best compromise cluster of positive deviants 
as the cluster that had the shortest MIDIP in scaled indicator space (each 
indicator scaled from 0 to 1). This definition of the best compromise 
gives equal weight to different indicators and is scale-invariant. MIDIP 
was derived as:

MIDIPc =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑
n

k=1

dk,c
2
√

(9)

dk,c =
⃒⃒⃒⃒

pk,c −qk

mdk

⃒⃒⃒⃒
(10)

mdk = maximumk −minimumk
(11)

where c (=1, 2, …, 7) represents positive deviant clusters, and k (=1, 2, 
…, n) denotes the sustainability indicators. For indicator k, dk,c means 
the range-scaled distance from the centroid of cluster c (pk,c) to the ideal 
point (qk), while mdk is the maximum discrepancy across the whole 
population. 
In rare occasions, the clusters closest to the ideal point may still

Fig. 2. Visual representation of positive deviants (circles filled with yellow, 
light blue, and green), dominated systems (circles filled with grey), and 
exemplary systems (circles filled with light blue). Each circle represents a 
cropping system observation. G1 and G2 denote two competing goals of sys­
tems, and the solid arrows indicate the respective optimization directions. Each 
ellipse with a dashed border denotes a positive deviant cluster. The blue square 
is the ideal system, corresponding in all indicators with the best value observed 
over the whole population of cases. The red arrows indicate the multi-indicator 
distance from the cluster centroid to the ideal system (MIDIP). Positive de­
viants, also known as Pareto-optimal systems, are not dominated by any other 
systems. Exemplary systems are defined as the positive deviants that reach the 
best compromise between multiple goals and their cluster is characterized by 
the shortest MIDIP. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

6

include extreme observations. As an indicator for the occurrence of this 
situation, HDIP, defined as the standard deviation of distances to the 
ideal point of all indicators, was also quantified for each cluster:

HDIPc =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑
n

k=1

(
dk,c −dc

)2

n −1

√
√
√
√
(12)

where n is the number of indicators. dc denotes the mean of dk,c across 
the indicator set for cluster c. The cluster of exemplary systems should 
also have the relatively low HDIP to ensure the most balanced perfor­
mance. When a cluster has the lowest MIDIP but not the lowest HDIP, it 
is needed to explicitly list dk,c for each indicator of all clusters. This can 
help to decide whether such a high HDIP is acceptable or not.

2.6. Quantification and explanation of sustainability gaps

2.6.1. Comparison between exemplary and other systems 
The sustainability gap for the indicator k (SGk) was defined as the 
difference between the mean performance of exemplary systems and 
that of other systems, expressed as:

SGk = MPexem,k −MPother,k
(13)

where MPexem,k and MPother,k represent the mean values of indicator k of 
exemplary and other systems, respectively. 
In addition to the aforementioned individual sustainability in­
dicators, we also compared the exemplary and other systems in terms of 
an efficiency indicator (economic labor productivity, ELP, USD/caput) 
and three footprint metrics including N footprint (NF, kg N/GCal), C 
footprint (CF, Mg CO2 eq./GCal), and blue water footprint (BWF, mm/ 
GCal). These indicators were calculated for each observation as follows:

ELP = GMtotal/LUtotal
(14)

NF = NLtotal/DEYtotal
(15)

CF = GHGnet/DEYtotal
(16)

BWF =
∑

i

IRi

/

DEYtotal
(17)

The difference in mean values of all indicators between exemplary 
and other systems was tested through t-tests with equal variances at a 
significance level of 0.05 using the function t.test in R.

2.6.2. Identification of variables underlying sustainability gaps 
After quantification of sustainability gaps between exemplary and 
other systems, we analyzed which factors might lead to these differences 
in indicators. In this step, we compared various explanatory variables 
describing management practices (e.g., sowing density, N application 
rate, number of irrigation events, etc.), biophysical context (e.g., soil 
organic matter content, soil bulk density), and socioeconomic context (e. 
g., educational experience of household heads, household labor avail­
ability) between exemplary and other systems (Table S7). Differences in 
values of such indicators between exemplary and other systems were 
tested by t-tests.

2.7. Establishment of a sustainable cropping system prototype

Sustainability performance and explanatory variables that charac­
terized exemplary systems were summarized to establish a sustainable 
wheat-maize production prototype. Values in the prototype were the 
average of all exemplary cases. Flexible options that featured in some of 
the exemplary cases were also presented. This prototype could inform 
relevant stakeholders, including agricultural authorities, extension staff, 
and other producers, of the sustainability gaps of current wheat-maize 
systems and associated feasible improvement interventions tailored to

local conditions.

3. Results

3.1. Indicator performance, positive deviants, and dominated systems

We found large variations in each of sustainability indicators over 
the whole population of wheat-maize observations, with coefficients of 
variation of 0.12–0.53 (Table 1). This shows that the performance of 
wheat-maize systems greatly varied among households in Quzhou. 
Using Pareto ranking, 16% of cases (n = 56) were classified as positive 
deviants (Pareto-optimal cases) with Pareto rank 1 while the remainder 
was classified as dominated systems (sub-optimal cases). Accordingly, 
positive deviants reached better performance than dominated systems. 
For example, the average gross margin and dietary energy yield of 
positive deviants was 24% and 10% higher than that of dominated 
systems. Meanwhile, groundwater depletion, N loss, net GHG emission 
and pesticide use of positive deviants were on average 26%, 32%, 34%, 
and 13% lower, respectively, than that of dominated systems. However, 
the coefficient of variation of each indicator of positive deviants was still 
high (0.14–0.50), which means positive deviants had contrasting pat­
terns of sustainability performance with possible trade-offs between 
different indicators.

3.2. Characteristics of positive deviant clusters and exemplary system 
identification

Using hierarchical clustering, we divided the positive deviants into 
seven clusters: PD1-PD7 (Fig. 3; Fig. S2). The clusters PD1-PD4 had 
higher average economic and dietary energy output than PD5-PD7 and 
the dominated systems. PD1-PD3, however, underperformed in terms of 
labor and environmental indicators. Of these three, PD1 had very high 
pesticide input (15.4 doses/year) and labor input (388 h/ha/year), 
while PD2 was characterized by high groundwater depletion (281 mm/ 
year), N loss (137 kg N/ha/year), and net GHG emission (6.1 Mg CO2 
eq./ha/year). PD3 had relatively high groundwater depletion (269 mm/ 
year) and pesticide use (8.6 doses/year). On the other hand, PD5-PD7 
resulted in markedly lower average gross margin and dietary energy 
yield than PD1-PD4 and even the dominated systems, though they 
performed best on some other indicators, i.e., groundwater depletion of 
PD5, N loss of PD6 and PD7, and labor use of PD7. By contrast, PD4 
achieved the best compromise across all indicators, with the lowest 
values of MIDIP and HDIP (Fig. 3) among the seven clusters. Therefore, 
we selected PD4 which contained 9 observations (2.6% of the popula­
tion) as exemplary systems with cultivation practices that might qualify 
for adoption by other farmers.

3.3. Sustainability gaps between exemplary and other systems

Comparison of multifaceted indicators between exemplary and other 
systems shows large sustainability gaps of wheat-maize double cropping 
in Quzhou (Fig. 4; Table S9). Mean gross margin and dietary energy 
yield of exemplary systems were 49% and 17% higher than the average 
of other systems (p < 0.05). Meanwhile, relative to other systems, from 
the environmental perspective, exemplary systems resulted in 31%, 
69%, and 46% lower groundwater depletion, net GHG emission, and 
pesticide use (p < 0.05), and they had on average 34% lower N loss (p =
0.058). The mean labor consumption of exemplary systems was 17% 
lower than that of other systems (p = 0.050), despite a large variation of 
this indicator for exemplary systems. 
Exemplary systems also had 47% higher economic labor productivity 
while resulting in 44%, 59%, and 38% lower N footprint, C footprint, 
and blue water footprint, respectively, when compared with other sys­
tems (p < 0.05; Fig. 5).

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

7

3.4. Explanatory variables underlying exemplary systems

Variables concerning crop management were compared between 
exemplary and other systems (Fig. 6). First of all, exemplary systems 
tended to have a higher planting density of maize than other systems 
(7.8 vs. 6.8 plants/m2; p < 0.05). Compared with other systems, 
exemplary systems had 24% lower annual N application rate, mainly 
due to a lower N input for wheat (203 vs. 288 kg N/ha/season; p < 0.05). 
Fourteen wheat-maize cases adopted animal manure amendment in this 
study, but only one case with the lowest total N input among them was 
identified as an exemplary system (Table S10). The total irrigation 
amount per year of exemplary systems was 27% lower than that of other 
systems as a result of the lower number of irrigation events in both 
wheat (3 vs. 4) and maize (1 vs. 2) (both p < 0.05). In addition, exem­
plary systems applied 43% and 38% fewer doses of insecticides and 
herbicides than other systems, respectively (p < 0.05), while no signif­
icant difference in fungicide use existed. Wheat sowing density, phos­
phorus and potassium inputs, and diesel use were not significantly 
different between exemplary and other systems. 
We also compared variables on the biophysical and socio-economic 
context between exemplary and other systems (Table 2). Four soil 
properties including soil organic matter, soil bulk density, soil Olsen-P as 
well as soil electrical conductivity were not different between exemplary 
and other systems. Likewise, there were no significant differences in 
household labor availability, income per capita, and educational and 
cropping experience of the household head between exemplary and 
other systems.

3.5. Exemplary system-informed prototype of the wheat-maize system

Based on the above results regarding exemplary systems, an attain­
able prototype of a sustainable wheat-maize double cropping system 
was established (Fig. 7). This prototype features a best compromise 
across economic, societal, and environmental indicators. Compared to 
the conventional wheat-maize system representing non-exemplary sys­
tems, the sustainable prototype was characterized by increased maize 
planting density, lower N input for wheat, manure amendment without 
an increase in total N input, and a reduced input of irrigation water and 
pesticides (especially insecticides and herbicides) for both wheat and 
maize.

4. Discussion

We found large variability in indicator performance among 344 cases 
of wheat-maize double cropping in Quzhou county in terms of seven 
economic, societal, and environmental indicators (Table 1). We identi­
fied positive deviants (Pareto-optimality), and then partitioned them 
into seven clusters (PD1-PD7) with contrasting sustainability patterns 
(Table 1; Fig. 3; Fig. S2). Nine cases (2.6%) constituting PD4 were 
categorized as “exemplary systems”, which represented the best

compromise sustainability performance over the indicator set, on 
average outperforming all other systems (n = 335) in each indicator 
(Fig. 4). We identified the practices that could close the sustainability 
gaps between exemplary and other systems: higher maize planting 
density, lower N fertilizer rate for wheat, partial substitution of inor­
ganic fertilizer by manure, lower frequency of irrigation and insecticide 
and herbicide application (Fig. 5). Finally, we proposed an exemplary 
system-informed prototype of sustainable wheat-maize production 
(Fig. 6), which could be adopted by local farmers to reconcile multiple 
domains of agricultural sustainability.

4.1. Identification of exemplary wheat-maize systems for sustainable 
production

Heterogeneous sustainability performance within a population of 
existing wheat-maize systems provided an opportunity to identify the 
sustainable cases exemplary to others. The “bottom-up” perspective that 
identified sustainable wheat-maize systems can be more suitable to local 
contexts and better handle multiple (more than three) indicators, than 
those identified by the “top-down” approaches, e.g., crop expert 
recommendation (Xiao et al., 2019) and mechanistic model simulation 
(Xin and Tao, 2019). This is because the “bottom-up” approaches give 
solutions that have been implemented under the local context, and trade 
off different sustainability attributes in a way that is already adopted 
and proven in reality. We therefore identified exemplary systems 
through investigating the diversity of wheat-maize cultivation by prac­
tical farmers. 
This study used a positive deviance approach combining Pareto 
ranking, positive deviant clustering, and distance-based ordination 
(MIDIP and HDIP) to select wheat-maize systems that reached the best 
compromise across seven indicators (i.e., exemplary systems). Pareto 
ranking identified positive deviants accounting for 16% of all observa­
tions. Pareto-optimality may include cases that perform well in some 
indictors at a high cost of others. When we equally emphasize all sus­
tainability domains, these unbalanced positive deviants are not 
acceptable and thus need to be ruled out. To do so, we used the clus­
tering technique to divide positive deviants into seven clusters, in each 
of which wheat-maize cases had similar sustainability patterns. Then 
MIDIP and HDIP ordination of clusters eventually helped us to identify 
the cluster (PD4) containing nine exemplary (compromise) systems. 
Compared to conventional approaches, this method has three advan­
tages: 1) Greater capacity to consider multiple indicators than conven­
tional grouping methods such as quadrant and clustering analysis for all 
observations (Ha et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2020); 2) The benchmark-free 
method to filter out unbalanced cases and to select cases reaching the 
best compromise, unlike threshold values- or population mean-based 
selection (Modernel et al., 2018; Adelhart Toorop et al., 2020; Jiang 
et al., 2021); 3) Identified exemplary systems are locally viable, whereas 
externally developed solutions might not fit the local context. 
We defined sustainability gaps in this study as the difference in

Table 1 
Indicator performance of wheat-maize double cropping systems in Quzhou.

Indicator 
Unit 
All observations (na=344) 
Positive deviants (n = 56) 
Dominated systems (n = 288)

Mean 
SDb 
CVc 
Mean 
SD 
CV 
Mean 
SD 
CV

Gross margin 
USD/ha/yrd 
2215 
689 
0.31 
2779 
706 
0.25 
2105 
630 
0.30 
Dietary energy yield 
GCal/ha/yr 
52.3 
6.0 
0.12 
56.9 
7.7 
0.14 
51.6 
5.4 
0.10 
Labor use 
h/ha/yr 
253 
79 
0.31 
235 
78 
0.33 
256 
78 
0.31 
Groundwater depletion 
mm/yr 
283 
69 
0.24 
232 
62 
0.27 
293 
66 
0.23 
N loss 
kg N/ha/yr 
135 
71 
0.53 
96 
23 
0.24 
142 
75 
0.52 
Net GHG emission 
Mg CO2 eq./ha/yr 
7.40 
2.12 
0.29 
5.18 
1.13 
0.22 
7.83 
2.00 
0.26 
Pesticide use 
doses/yr 
9.0 
4.0 
0.44 
8.0 
4.0 
0.50 
9.2 
4.0 
0.43

a n means sample size. 
b SD means standard deviation. 
c CV means coefficient of variation. 
d yr is the abbreviation of year.

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

8

Fig. 3. Indicator performance (a-g) and distance-related outcomes (h) of wheat-maize double cropping systems in Quzhou. All cases were grouped into positive deviant clusters (PD1-PD7) and dominated systems (DS, n 
= 288). A blue dot denotes a wheat-maize observation. The black dot represents the mean of all observations within a cluster, while the error bar represents the standard error. The sample sizes for PD1-PD7 are 5, 5, 10, 
9, 8, 8, and 11 respectively. MIDIP indicates the multi-indicator distance to the ideal point, and HDIP indicates the heterogeneity of distances to the ideal point of all indicators. (For interpretation of the references to 
colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

9

Fig. 4. Sustainability performances (a-g) of the exemplary (XS, n = 9) and other systems (OS, n = 335) in Quzhou. A blue dot denotes a wheat-maize observation. The 
black dot represents the mean of all observations in a group while the error bar represents the standard error. The p values are the results of t-tests comparing 
indicator values of XS and OS. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 5. Economic labor productivity (a) and environ­
mental footprints (b-d) of the exemplary (XS, n = 9) and 
other systems (OS, n = 335) in Quzhou. A blue dot denotes 
a wheat-maize observation. The black dot represents the 
mean of all observations in a group while the error bar 
represents the standard error. The p values are the results 
of t-tests comparing indicator values of XS and OS. (For 
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this 
article.)

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

10

Fig. 6. Variables describing crop management (a-o) of exemplary (XS, n = 9) and other systems (OS, n = 335) in Quzhou. A green dot denotes a wheat-maize observation. The black dot represents the mean of all 
observations in a group while the error bar represents the standard error. The p values are the results of t-tests comparing variable values of XS and OS. The yr in the unit is the abbreviation of year. (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

11

indicator performance between exemplary and other systems, repre­
senting the attainable scope of improvement using the best compromise 
over the indicator set as an exemplary system for adoption. The presence 
of large sustainability gaps in our study indicates that if local wheat- 
maize cases could adopt practices of exemplary systems, the holistic 
sustainability of wheat-maize systems in Quzhou could greatly improve. 
The positive deviance approach is a promising data-driven methodology 
to inform multi-dimensional sustainability of cropping systems.

4.2. Explanatory variables behind sustainability gaps

Sustainability performance of cropping systems is generally depen­
dent on management practices and farming context (Deytieux et al., 
2016). We selected management and contextual variables that are 
commonly used to characterize wheat-maize systems (Table S7), and 
identified key variables that might be associated with the sustainability 
gaps between exemplary and other systems. The results indicate that 
exemplary systems were mainly underpinned by a number of more 
sustainable practices but not by more favorable contexts (Fig. 6; 
Table 2). 
Exemplary systems were characterized by a higher maize planting 
density (7.8 plants/m2). Previous studies showed that a planting density 
of 7.5–9 plants/m2 was crucial for maize to better utilize the light and 
heat resources, thereby establishing high-yield systems in the NCP 
(Meng et al., 2018b; Ren et al., 2021). Hence this practice was conducive 
to dietary energy production and economic-value creation. Most sur­
veyed farmers in Quzhou used modern maize cultivars, but still adopted 
conventional planting rates (6–7 plants/m2) fitting outdated cultivars 
which were prone to lodging in a dense population. This knowledge gap 
needs to be filled to facilitate the farmers’ adoption of this productive 
practice. 
As for nutrient management, the lower N input for wheat (204 kg N/ 
ha) and proper manure use (partial substitution of chemical fertilizer at 
the optimal N rate) were observed within exemplary systems 
(Table S10). Farmers in Quzhou tend to overuse N fertilizer for wheat 
(286 N/ha/year on average) as insurance against nutrient deficiency 
and yield loss. The wheat N rate of exemplary systems was closer to 
grain N removal of the high-yield wheat system (165 kg N/ha; Chuan 
et al., 2013), thereby avoiding massive N loss and GHG emission without 
compromising crop yield. Of fourteen wheat-maize cases with manure 
amendment, most non-exemplary systems overused inorganic N fertil­
izer (250–660 kg N/ha, Table S10) thus offsetting the beneficial effect of 
manure input (e.g., GHG emission mitigation). Manure should be used 
without exceeding the agronomically optimal N rate to provide the 
desired environmental benefits (Zhang et al., 2020), as the only one

exemplary system applying manure did. Otherwise, manure input would 
lead to extra N loss and economic and labor costs. 
Besides, exemplary systems had a smaller number of irrigation 
events (3 and 1 for wheat and maize respectively) by canceling irrigation 
events at some non-water-critical growth stages (e.g., the regreening 
stage of wheat and some precipitation-dense periods during the maize 
season). This practice could not only mitigate groundwater depletion, 
but also decrease labor use and electricity-incurred economic costs, and 
GHG emission, without taking a toll on agronomic output. Previous 
studies showed that rationally reduced irrigation stimulated root 
development to enhance water uptake, and extended crop grain-filling 
duration, thus maintained or increased grain yield in wheat-maize sys­
tems, which supported our findings (Xu et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018). 
Exemplary systems also had fewer insecticide and herbicide appli­
cations than other systems, which might be related to a selection of 
better targeted pesticide types, appropriate application timings, and 
moderate nutrient and water input. Misuse of chemical pesticides was 
widespread in crop production in Quzhou. For example, repeated use of 
the same insecticide products, spraying herbicides later than best tim­
ings (like after weed outbreak), and combating target pests or weeds 
with wrong pesticide products, have resulted in overuse and sometimes 
crop damage (Li et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2015). Besides, optimal 
nutrient and water input could promote plant quality and growth, thus 
increasing the resistance to pests (M´edi`ene et al., 2011) and competi­
tiveness to weeds (Kaur et al., 2018), which could reduce the reliance on 
external pesticides. Insecticide and herbicide use in exemplary systems 
needs to be further investigated to assess the scope for more efficient 
crop protection in Quzhou. 
There were no statistical differences in biophysical and socioeco­
nomic context between exemplary and other systems (Table 2). The soil 
dataset showed that the range of soil properties across Quzhou was 
narrow (Li et al., 2022). For instance, the range of soil organic matter 
content of wheat-maize fields was 1–2%, which would not be enough to 
affect crop growth under the high-level nutrient and water inputs 
(Oelofse et al., 2015). The variability of household backgrounds of 
exemplary systems was large, indicating those exemplary systems were 
developed by farmers in contrasting socioeconomic farm situations. This 
outcome justified the assumption that the identified exemplary systems 
would be transferrable and viable for wider adoption in Quzhou.

4.3. Development and future implementation of the sustainable prototype

In this study, a sustainable prototype for wheat-maize production 
was developed to facilitate the promotion of identified exemplary sys­
tems (Fig. 6). This prototype represented the mean values of nine 
exemplary cases since the variation among these cases was small, given 
the wide range of performance across the entire set of wheat-maize 
cases. Manure substitution, characteristic for one of the exemplary 
cases, was also captured as a flexible option in the prototype. After that, 
we discussed our prototype with several local agronomists and they 
ascertained its viability based on their knowledge and experience. If, in 
contrast to our findings, the variation within the selected cluster would 
be so large that cases in the cluster could not be aggregated into a certain 
type of cropping system, researchers could propose multiple sustainable 
prototypes that correspond to individual exemplary cases. 
In further work, it is needed to work with a population of farmers 
with sub-optimal wheat-maize systems to adopt the practices in the 
sustainable prototype and to verify that their performance is improved 
as expected. We could provide technology training on this prototype to 
participant farmers and organize these farmers to visit households with 
exemplary systems. The implementation of this prototype would be 
easily accepted by farmers because it was locally proven to help gain 
more farming incomes. The local government could also offer subsidies 
to participants in order to further incentivize wider promotion as this 
prototype could greatly lower environmental costs, thereby improving 
the public benefits. Moreover, if some sub-optimal systems improve

Table 2 
Variables describing the farming context of the exemplary (XS) and other sys­
tems (OS) in Quzhou. Data were shown as “mean ± standard error of the mean” 
for each contextual variable. The p values are the results of t-tests comparing 
variable values of XS and OS.

Contextual variable 
Unit 
XS (n = 9) 
OS (n =
335) 
p- 
value

Soil properties:     
Soil bulk density 
g/cm3 
1.07 ± 0.04 
1.11 ± 0.00 
0.22 
Soil organic matter 
g/kg 
12.4 ± 0.7 
13.9 ± 0.2 
0.08 
Soil Olsen-P 
mg/kg 
21.6 ± 1.7 
20.6 ± 0.3 
0.61 
Soil ECa 
dS/m 
4.36 ± 0.25 
4.18 ± 0.04 
0.48 
Household 
background:     
Labor availability 
capita/ha 
3.16 ± 0.83 
3.21 ± 0.15 
0.96

Income per capita 
USD/capita/ 
yr 
3109 ±
1546 
2199 ± 134 
0.28 
Education years 
years 
6.7 ± 1.4 
5.9 ± 0.2 
0.57 
Cropping 
experience 
years 
39 ± 2 
37 ± 1 
0.67

a EC: Electrical conductivity.

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

12

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of exemplary system-informed wheat-maize system transition towards multifaceted sustainability improvement. The values of the conventional wheat-maize system and the sustainable 
wheat-maize prototype are the mean values of the variables characterizing other systems (OS) and exemplary systems (XS), respectively. IF denotes inorganic fertilizers; IN, HE, and FU represents insecticides, herbicides, 
and fungicides respectively. DEY, GWD, GHGn, and Pesti. indicate dietary energy yield, groundwater depletion, net greenhouse gas emission, and pesticide use, respectively. The yr in the unit is the abbreviation of year.

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

13

their performance by using identified sustainable practices, there would 
be new Pareto-optimal and exemplary wheat-maize cases. In this situ­
ation, repeated application of the positive deviance approach for crop­
ping system redesign might help the local whole set of cropping systems 
to move in the desired direction in an evolutionary manner.

4.4. Limitation and outlook

Uncertainty exists in the presented multi-criteria assessment because 
our indicators were empirically quantified using many parameters, 
especially in the environmental domain. To minimize the effects of 
result uncertainty, we used well-accepted methods to calculate the in­
dicators (groundwater depletion: Yang et al., 2021; N loss: Cui et al., 
2018; net GHG emission: Xu and Lan, 2017; pesticide use: Lechenet 
et al., 2017), and then extracted parameters calibrated to local condi­
tions from a range of publications, statistics, and expert knowledge (see 
Table S2-S6). We also compared our empirical results with those 
measured in local experiments. For example, the estimated amount of 
soil C stock change (soil C sequestration minus degradation) was close to 
previous in situ measurement results (Cui et al., 2022). The average 
groundwater depletion and N loss in this study were also comparable to 
the results from field trials in the NCP (Yang et al., 2015; Song et al., 
2018; Sha et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020). This indicates that our multi- 
criteria assessment is reasonable and reliable, although not as accurate 
as on-site measurement data. Measurement data could be included in 
future analysis to improve result certainty if available. 
We considered as explanatory variables the most important man­
agement variables related to wheat-maize performance. However, some 
management practices were still not captured due to data accessibility, 
e.g., farmers did not remember the name of cultivars they used, and 
neither could they give us exact sowing and harvest dates. During our 
survey work, we found that the variety selection (mostly Jimai 22 and 
Luyuan 502 for wheat; Denghai 605 for maize) and cropping calendar 
(Oct.5-Oct.10 and Jun.1–10 for wheat and maize sowing respectively) 
were quite homogenous among wheat-maize observations. Therefore, 
variation in varieties or sowing dates might not markedly affect crop­
ping system performance. In future research, a tracking survey that 
monitors all cropping activities implemented during the whole cropping 
system duration could be an effective way to avoid missing information 
that farmers cannot precisely report in recall (Fumagalli et al., 2011). 
Similarly, some contextual variables that were not recorded in this 
study might have affected the sustainability performance of the wheat- 
maize systems. For instance, access to technology training and to sources 
of animal manure could play a role. These unobserved farm character­
istics would affect farmers’ decisions on cultivation practices that are 
highly associated with cropping system performance, e.g., manure 
amendment. A broader range of variables regarding farming contexts 
could be considered in future study. 
Exemplary systems could be further elaborated by conducting a re­
turn survey of farmers who practiced exemplary systems. It can be ex­
pected that the follow-up revisiting could help us gain more insights into 
their success, e.g., detailed information on crop management and 
farming context (Steinke et al., 2019), which could make the sustainable 
prototype more practical. 
In the future, this nested positive deviance approach could also be 
applied in other major cropping systems elsewhere in which multiple 
sustainability challenges exist. Sustainability indicators and exemplary 
positive deviants can be selected in terms of the local reality and 
stakeholder preference. With a broader application of the positive 
deviance approach, global cropping systems would have the great po­
tential to improve their sustainability, contributing to achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals advocated by the United Nations.

5. Conclusion

We proposed a nested positive deviance approach to find feasible

entry-points to close multi-dimensional sustainability gaps of cropping 
systems. Taking wheat-maize double cropping in the NCP as a case, we 
empirically evaluated economic, societal, and environmental indicators 
relevant to local sustainability challenges, and identified exemplary 
systems that reached the best compromise across all indicators from all 
positive deviants. Then multifaceted sustainability gaps were quantified, 
and key factors explaining those gaps were determined. We found that 
the sustainability performance of wheat-maize systems greatly varied 
across households. Most positive deviants represented strong trade-offs 
among indicators, while nine cases could serve as exemplary systems 
due to their acceptable compromise among indicators. Results also 
suggested that sustainability gaps of wheat-maize systems could be 
closed if other farmers implemented the key management practices of 
exemplary systems. Those sustainable practices included increased 
maize planting density, moderate N input, lower number of irrigation 
events as well as insecticide and herbicide use. Meanwhile, no system­
atic differences in farming context were observed between exemplary 
systems and other cases. This study showed that the presented positive 
deviance approach is a pragmatic method to identify locally viable so­
lutions to improve sustainability of cropping systems by deciphering the 
diversity of farmers’ practices.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Zhengyuan Liang: Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. 
Wopke van der Werf: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Zhan 
Xu: Investigation, Data curation. Jiali Cheng: Investigation, Data 
curation. Chong Wang: Data curation, Resources. Wen-Feng Cong: 
Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. Chao­
chun Zhang: Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition. Fusuo 
Zhang: Supervision, Resources, Project administration. Jeroen C.J. 
Groot: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of Competing Interest

None.

Data availability

Data and R script used in the analyses are available from the corre­
sponding authors on reasonable request.

Acknowledgment

We acknowledge colleagues who participated in the household sur­
vey and data entry. This study was financially supported by the China 
Scholarship Council (No. 201913043), Hainan University, the Program 
of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32072676) and 
the Program of Advanced Discipline Construction in Beijing (Agriculture 
Green Development).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103471.

References

Adelhart Toorop, R., Ceccarelli, V., Bijarniya, D., Jat, M.L., Jat, R.K., Lopez-Ridaura, S., 
Groot, J.C.J., 2020. Using a positive deviance approach to inform farming systems 
redesign: a case study from Bihar, India. Agric. Syst. 185, 102942 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102942. 
Albanna, B., Heeks, R., 2019. Positive deviance, big data, and development: a systematic 
literature review. Electron. J. Inf. Syst. Dev. Ctries. 85, e12063 https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/isd2.12063. 
Aouadi, N., Aubertot, J.N., Caneill, J., Munier-Jolain, N., 2015. Analyzing the impact of 
the farming context and environmental factors on cropping systems: a regional case

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

14

study in Burgundy. Eur. J. Agron. 66, 21–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eja.2015.02.006. 
Brauns, B., Jakobsen, R., Song, X., Bjerg, P.L., 2018. Pesticide use in the wheat-maize 
double cropping systems of the North China plain: assessment, field study, and 
implications. Sci. Total Environ. 616–617, 1307–1316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2017.10.187. 
Chen, X., Xu, X., Lu, Z., Zhang, W., Yang, J., Hou, Y., Wang, X., Zhou, S., Li, Y., Wu, L., 
Zhang, F., 2020. Carbon footprint of a typical pomelo production region in China 
based on farm survey data. J. Clean. Prod. 277, 124041 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2020.124041. 
Chuan, L., He, P., Jin, J., Li, S., Grant, C., Xu, X., Qiu, S., Zhao, S., Zhou, W., 2013. 
Estimating nutrient uptake requirements for wheat in China. Field Crop Res. 146, 
96–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2013.02.015. 
Cui, Z., Zhang, H., Chen, X., Zhang, C., Ma, W., Huang, C., Zhang, W., Mi, G., Miao, Y., 
Li, X., Gao, Q., Yang, J., Wang, Z., Ye, Y., Guo, S., Lu, J., Huang, J., Lv, S., Sun, Y., 
Liu, Y., Peng, X., Ren, J., Li, S., Deng, X., Shi, X., Zhang, Qiang, Yang, Z., Tang, L., 
Wei, C., Jia, L., Zhang, J., He, M., Tong, Y., Tang, Q., Zhong, X., Liu, Z., Cao, N., 
Kou, C., Ying, H., Yin, Y., Jiao, X., Zhang, Qingsong, Fan, M., Jiang, R., Zhang, F., 
Dou, Z., 2018. Pursuing sustainable productivity with millions of smallholder 
farmers. Nature 555, 363–366. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25785. 
Cui, H., Luo, Y., Chen, J., Jin, M., Li, Y., Wang, Z., 2022. Straw return strategies to 
improve soil properties and crop productivity in a winter wheat-summer maize 
cropping system. Eur. J. Agron. 133, 126436 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eja.2021.126436. 
Davis, K.F., Chhatre, A., Rao, N.D., Singh, D., Ghosh-Jerath, S., Mridul, A., Poblete- 
Cazenave, M., Pradhan, N., DeFries, R., 2019. Assessing the sustainability of post- 
green revolution cereals in India. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 25034–25041. https:// 
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1910935116. 
Deytieux, V., Munier-Jolain, N., Caneill, J., 2016. Assessing the sustainability of cropping 
systems in single- and multi-site studies. A review of methods. Eur. J. Agron. 72, 
107–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.10.005. 
Dumont, B., Modernel, P., Benoit, M., Ruggia, A., Soca, P., Dernat, S., Tournadre, H., 
Dogliotti, S., Rossing, W.A.H., 2020. Mobilizing ecological processes for herbivore 
production: farmers and researchers learning together. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 4, 
544828 https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2020.544828. 
Feng, S., Xu, W., Cheng, M., Ma, Y., Wu, L., Kang, J., Wang, K., Tang, A., Collett, J.L., 
Fang, Y., Goulding, K., Liu, X., Zhang, F., 2022. Overlooked nonagricultural and 
wintertime agricultural NH3 emissions in Quzhou County, North China plain: 
evidence from 15N-stable isotopes. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 9, 127–133. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00935. 
Foley, J.A., Ramankutty, N., Brauman, K.A., Cassidy, E.S., Gerber, J.S., Johnston, M., 
Mueller, N.D., O’Connell, C., Ray, D.K., West, P.C., Balzer, C., Bennett, E.M., 
Carpenter, S.R., Hill, J., Monfreda, C., Polasky, S., Rockstr¨om, J., Sheehan, J., 
Siebert, S., Tilman, D., Zaks, D.P.M., 2011. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature 
478, 337–342. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10452. 
Fumagalli, M., Acutis, M., Mazzetto, F., Vidotto, F., Sali, G., Bechini, L., 2011. An analysis 
of agricultural sustainability of cropping systems in arable and dairy farms in an 
intensively cultivated plain. Eur. J. Agron. 34, 71–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eja.2010.11.001. 
Ghose, B., 2014. Food security and food self-sufficiency in China: from past to 2050. 
Food Energy Secur. 3, 86–95. https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.48. 
Groot, J.C.J., Rossing, W.A.H., 2011. Model-aided learning for adaptive management of 
natural resources: an evolutionary design perspective. Methods Ecol. Evol. 2, 
643–650. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00114.x. 
Groot, J.C.J., Oomen, G.J.M., Rossing, W.A.H., 2012. Multi-objective optimization and 
design of farming systems. Agric. Syst. 110, 63–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2012.03.012. 
Ha, N., Feike, T., Angenendt, E., Xiao, H., Bahrs, E., 2015. Impact of farm management 
diversity on the environmental and economic performance of the wheat–maize 
cropping system in the North China plain. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 13, 350–366. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2015.1004856. 
Herington, M.J., van de Fliert, E., 2018. Positive deviance in theory and practice: a 
conceptual review. Deviant Behav. 39, 664–678. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
01639625.2017.1286194. 
Huang, J., Xu, C., Ridoutt, B.G., Wang, X., Ren, P., 2017. Nitrogen and phosphorus losses 
and eutrophication potential associated with fertilizer application to cropland in 
China. J. Clean. Prod. 159, 171–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2017.05.008. 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 2006. Environmental 
Management: Life Cycle Assessment; Requirements and Guidelines. ISO Geneva, 
Switzerland.  
Jiang, W., Zhu, A., Wang, C., Zhang, F., Jiao, X., 2021. Optimizing wheat production and 
reducing environmental impacts through scientist–farmer engagement: lessons from 
the North China plain. Food Energy Secur. 10 https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.255. 
Ju, X., Xing, G., Chen, X., Zhang, S., Zhang, L., Liu, X., Cui, Z., Yin, B., Christie, P., 
Zhu, Z., Zhang, F., 2009. Reducing environmental risk by improving N management 
in intensive Chinese agricultural systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 3041–3046. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0813417106. 
Kanter, D.R., Musumba, M., Wood, S.L.R., Palm, C., Antle, J., Balvanera, P., Dale, V.H., 
Havlik, P., Kline, K.L., Scholes, R.J., Thornton, P., Tittonell, P., Andelman, S., 2018. 
Evaluating agricultural trade-offs in the age of sustainable development. Agric. Syst. 
163, 73–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2016.09.010. 
Kassambara, A., 2017. Practical Guide to Cluster Analysis in R. Unsupervised Machine 
Learning (Edition 1). STHDA. http://www.sthda.com.

Kaur, S., Kaur, R., Chauhan, B.S., 2018. Understanding crop-weed-fertilizer-water 
interactions and their implications for weed management in agricultural systems. 
Crop Prot. 103, 65–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cropro.2017.09.011. 
Kong, X., Zhang, X., Lal, R., Zhang, F., Chen, X., Niu, Z., Han, L., Song, W., 2016. 
Groundwater depletion by agricultural intensification in China’s HHH Plains, since 
1980s. In: Advances in Agronomy. Elsevier, pp. 59–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
bs.agron.2015.09.003. 
Lechenet, M., Dessaint, F., Py, G., Makowski, D., Munier-Jolain, N., 2017. Reducing 
pesticide use while preserving crop productivity and profitability on arable farms. 
Nat. Plants 3, 17008. https://doi.org/10.1038/nplants.2017.8. 
Li, J., Lei, H., 2021. Tracking the spatio-temporal change of planting area of winter 
wheat-summer maize cropping system in the North China plain during 2001–2018. 
Comput. Electron. Agric. 187, 106222 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compag.2021.106222. 
Li, H., Zeng, E.Y., You, J., 2014. Mitigating pesticide pollution in China requires law 
enforcement, farmer training, and technological innovation: pesticide pollution, 
consumption, and mitigation in China. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 33, 963–971. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.2549. 
Li, S., Lei, Y., Zhang, Y., Liu, J., Shi, X., Jia, H., Wang, C., Chen, F., Chu, Q., 2019. 
Rational trade-offs between yield increase and fertilizer inputs are essential for 
sustainable intensification: a case study in wheat–maize cropping systems in China. 
Sci. Total Environ. 679, 328–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.05.085. 
Li, K., Wang, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Jiang, R., Feng, G., Liu, X., Zuo, Y., Yuan, H., 
Zhang, C., Gai, J., Tian, J., Li, H., Sun, Y., Yu, B., 2022. Evaluating the effects of 
agricultural inputs on the soil quality of smallholdings using improved indices. 
CATENA 209, 105838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2021.105838. 
Liu, T., Bruins, R., Heberling, M., 2018. Factors influencing farmers’ adoption of best 
management practices: a review and synthesis. Sustainability 10, 432. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/su10020432. 
M´edi`ene, S., Valantin-Morison, M., Sarthou, J.-P., de Tourdonnet, S., Gosme, M., 
Bertrand, M., Roger-Estrade, J., Aubertot, J.-N., Rusch, A., Motisi, N., Pelosi, C., 
Dor´e, T., 2011. Agroecosystem management and biotic interactions: a review. Agron. 
Sustain. Dev. 31, 491–514. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-011-0009-1. 
Meng, Z., Xu, X., Lin, W., Ge, B., Xie, Y., Song, B., Jia, S., Zhang, R., Peng, W., Wang, Y., 
Cheng, H., Yang, W., Zhao, H., 2018a. Role of ambient ammonia in particulate 
ammonium formation at a rural site in the North China plain. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 
18, 167–184. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-18-167-2018. 
Meng, Q., Cui, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, F., Chen, X., 2018b. Establishing high-yielding maize 
system for sustainable intensification in China. In: Advances in Agronomy. Elsevier, 
pp. 85–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.agron.2017.11.004. 
Meng, F., Wang, M., Strokal, M., Kroeze, C., Ma, L., Li, Y., Zhang, Q., Wei, Z., Hou, Y., 
Liu, X., Xu, W., Zhang, F., 2021. Nitrogen losses from food production in the North 
China plain: a case study for Quzhou. Sci. Total Environ. 151557 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151557. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (MARA), 
2022. The Plan of National Crop Production Development for the 14th Five-Year (In 
Chinese).  
Modernel, P., Dogliotti, S., Alvarez, S., Corbeels, M., Picasso, V., Tittonell, P., Rossing, W. 
A.H., 2018. Identification of beef production farms in the pampas and Campos area 
that stand out in economic and environmental performance. Ecol. Indic. 89, 
755–770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.01.038. 
National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC), 2020. China Statistics Yearbook. Chinese 
Statistics Press, Beijing (in Chinese).  
Niu, Y., Xie, G., Xiao, Y., Liu, J., Wang, Y., Luo, Q., Zou, H., Gan, S., Qin, K., Huang, M., 
2021. Spatiotemporal patterns and determinants of grain self-sufficiency in China. 
Foods 10, 747. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods10040747. 
Oelofse, M., Markussen, B., Knudsen, L., Schelde, K., Olesen, J.E., Jensen, L.S., Bruun, S., 
2015. Do soil organic carbon levels affect potential yields and nitrogen use 
efficiency? An analysis of winter wheat and spring barley field trials. Eur. J. Agron. 
66, 62–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.02.009. 
Ren, H., Han, K., Liu, Y., Zhao, Y., Zhang, L., He, Q., Li, Z., Zhang, Jibo, Liu, P., Wang, H., 
Zhang, Jiwang, Zhao, B., 2021. Improving smallholder farmers’ maize yields and 
economic benefits under sustainable crop intensification in the North China plain. 
Sci. Total Environ. 763, 143035 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143035. 
Savikurki, A., 2013. Positive Deviance in Small Holder Crop-Livestock Farming Systems 
in Northern Ghana. Master Thesis. Helsingfors Universitet. http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi 
:hulib-201507212072. 
Sha, Z., Ma, X., Loick, N., Lv, T., Cardenas, L.M., Ma, Y., Liu, X., Misselbrook, T., 2020. 
Nitrogen stabilizers mitigate reactive N and greenhouse gas emissions from an arable 
soil in North China plain: field and laboratory investigation. J. Clean. Prod. 258, 
121025 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121025. 
Song, X., Liu, M., Ju, X., Gao, B., Su, F., Chen, X., Rees, R.M., 2018. Nitrous oxide 
emissions increase exponentially when optimum nitrogen fertilizer rates are 
exceeded in the North China plain. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52, 12504–12513. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b03931. 
Spiegal, S., Bestelmeyer, B.T., Archer, D.W., Augustine, D.J., Boughton, E.H., 
Boughton, R.K., Cavigelli, M.A., Clark, P.E., Derner, J.D., Duncan, E.W., Hapeman, C. 
J., Harmel, R.D., Heilman, P., Holly, M.A., Huggins, D.R., King, K., Kleinman, P.J.A., 
Liebig, M.A., Locke, M.A., McCarty, G.W., Millar, N., Mirsky, S.B., Moorman, T.B., 
Pierson, F.B., Rigby, J.R., Robertson, G.P., Steiner, J.L., Strickland, T.C., Swain, H. 
M., Wienhold, B.J., Wulfhorst, J.D., Yost, M.A., Walthall, C.L., 2018. Evaluating 
strategies for sustainable intensification of US agriculture through the long-term 
agroecosystem research network. Environ. Res. Lett. 13, 034031 https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/1748-9326/aaa779. 
Steinke, J., Mgimiloko, M.G., Graef, F., Hammond, J., van Wijk, M.T., van Etten, J., 
2019. Prioritizing options for multi-objective agricultural development through the

Z. Liang et al.

Agricultural Systems 201 (2022) 103471

15

positive deviance approach. PLoS One 14, e0212926. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0212926. 
Sun, H., Zhang, X., Wang, E., Chen, S., Shao, L., 2015. Quantifying the impact of 
irrigation on groundwater reserve and crop production – a case study in the North 
China plain. Eur. J. Agron. 70, 48–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.07.001. 
Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, R., Li, J., Zhang, M., Zhou, S., Wang, Z., 2018. Reduced 
irrigation increases the water use efficiency and productivity of winter wheat- 
summer maize rotation on the North China plain. Sci. Total Environ. 618, 112–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.10.284. 
Wang, S., Hu, Y., Yuan, R., Feng, W., Pan, Y., Yang, Y., 2019. Ensuring water security, 
food security, and clean water in the North China plain – conflicting strategies. Curr. 
Opin. Environ. Sustain. 40, 63–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2019.09.008. 
Xiao, G., Zhao, Z., Liang, L., Meng, F., Wu, W., Guo, Y., 2019. Improving nitrogen and 
water use efficiency in a wheat-maize rotation system in the North China plain using 
optimized farming practices. Agric. Water Manag. 212, 172–180. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agwat.2018.09.011. 
Xin, Y., Tao, F., 2019. Optimizing genotype-environment-management interactions to 
enhance productivity and eco-efficiency for wheat-maize rotation in the North China 
plain. Sci. Total Environ. 654, 480–492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2018.11.126. 
Xu, X., Lan, Y., 2017. Spatial and temporal patterns of carbon footprints of grain crops in 
China. J. Clean. Prod. 146, 218–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2016.11.181. 
Xu, C., Tao, H., Tian, B., Gao, Y., Ren, J., Wang, P., 2016. Limited-irrigation improves 
water use efficiency and soil reservoir capacity through regulating root and canopy 
growth of winter wheat. Field Crop Res. 196, 268–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fcr.2016.07.009. 
Xu, T., Yan, D., Weng, B., Bi, W., Do, P., Liu, F., Wang, Y., Ma, J., 2018. The effect 
evaluation of comprehensive treatment for groundwater overdraft in Quzhou 
County. China. Water 10, 874. https://doi.org/10.3390/w10070874. 
Xu, D., Deng, X., Guo, S., Liu, S., 2019. Labor migration and farmland abandonment in 
rural China: empirical results and policy implications. J. Environ. Manag. 232, 
738–750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.11.136.

Yang, X., Chen, Y., Pacenka, S., Gao, W., Ma, L., Wang, G., Yan, P., Sui, P., Steenhuis, T. 
S., 2015. Effect of diversified crop rotations on groundwater levels and crop water 
productivity in the North China plain. J. Hydrol. 522, 428–438. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jhydrol.2015.01.010. 
Yang, Y., Wang, G., He, M., Pan, X., Wang, Z., 2018. China Food Composition Tables. 
Peking University Medical Press, Beijing, China (in Chinese).  
Yang, X., Steenhuis, T.S., Davis, K.F., Werf, W., Ritsema, C.J., Pacenka, S., Zhang, F., 
Siddique, K.H.M., Du, T., 2021. Diversified crop rotations enhance groundwater and 
economic sustainability of food production. Food Energy Secur. 10 https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/fes3.311. 
Zhang, C., Hu, R., Shi, G., Jin, Y., Robson, M.G., Huang, X., 2015. Overuse or underuse? 
An observation of pesticide use in China. Sci. Total Environ. 538, 1–6. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.08.031. 
Zhang, W., Cao, G., Li, X., Zhang, H., Wang, C., Liu, Q., Chen, X., Cui, Z., Shen, J., 
Jiang, R., Mi, G., Miao, Y., Zhang, F., Dou, Z., 2016. Closing yield gaps in China by 
empowering smallholder farmers. Nature 537, 671–674. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nature19368. 
Zhang, X., Fang, Q., Zhang, T., Ma, W., Velthof, G.L., Hou, Y., Oenema, O., Zhang, F., 
2020. Benefits and trade-offs of replacing synthetic fertilizers by animal manures in 
crop production in China: a meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 26, 888–900. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14826. 
Zhang, X., Yao, G., Vishwakarma, S., Dalin, C., Komarek, A.M., Kanter, D.R., Davis, K.F., 
Pfeifer, K., Zhao, J., Zou, T., D’Odorico, P., Folberth, C., Rodriguez, F.G., Fanzo, J., 
Rosa, L., Dennison, W., Musumba, M., Heyman, A., Davidson, E.A., 2021. 
Quantitative assessment of agricultural sustainability reveals divergent priorities 
among nations. One Earth 4, 1262–1277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
oneear.2021.08.015. 
Zheng, W., Wan, Y., Li, Y., Liu, Z., Chen, J., Zhou, H., Gao, Y., Chen, B., Zhang, M., 2020. 
Developing water and nitrogen budgets of a wheat-maize rotation system using auto- 
weighing lysimeters: effects of blended application of controlled-release and un- 
coated urea. Environ. Pollut. 263, 114383 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2020.114383.

Z. Liang et al.