Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Data in Brief

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dib

Data Article

Survey data on livelihoods and inputs and 
outputs of crop production in Quzhou county 
on the North China Plain

Zhan Xu a , b , d , ∗, Fan Li c , e , Jiali Cheng a , b , d , Zhengyuan Liang a , b , d , 
Jeroen C.J. Groot b , Wopke van der Werf a , Chaochun Zhang d

a Centre for Crop Systems Analysis Group, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, 
the Netherlands 
b Farming System Ecology Group, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the 
Netherlands 
c Development Economics Group, Wageningen University & Research, Hollandseweg 1, 6706 KN Wageningen, the 
Netherlands 
d State Key Laboratory of Nutrient Use and Management, College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, China 
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China 
e College of Economics and Management, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China

a r t i c l e 
i n f o

Article history: 
Received 23 November 2023 
Revised 20 February 2024 
Accepted 23 February 2024 
Available online 28 February 2024

Dataset link: Survey data on livelihoods 
and inputs and outputs of crop production 
activities in Quzhou county on the North 
China Plain (Original data)

Keywords: 
Village typology 
Cropping system 
Sustainability 
Input-output

a b s t r a c t

Farmers’ decisions on crop choice, management practices, 
and livelihood strategies are essential to agricultural sustain- 
ability. This data article describes three datasets on crop pro- 
duction in Quzhou, a county in the central part of North 
China Plain. The three datasets cover different scales. The 
village dataset assembles basic data on all 342 villages of 
Quzhou county, including information on population, land 
area, crop grown, labour, irrigation and markets. Data was 
sourced from the yearbook data of 2017 and a village cadres 
survey in 2018. The village dataset was used to create a vil- 
lage typology from which 35 villages belonging to seven vil- 
lage types (ﬁve for each type) were selected for stratiﬁed 
random sampling to collect information on farm character- 
istics and cropping practices. We surveyed these 35 villages, 
interviewing ﬁfteen farmer households per village (525 in to-

∗Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: zhan.xu@wur.nl (Z. Xu) .

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2024.110269 
2352-3409/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ )

2 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

tal) in 2020. The interviewees represented two farm man- 
agement models: smallholder farms and business farms. The 
resulting household dataset provides farm-level data, includ- 
ing demographic data of farming decision-makers and the 
number of household members, land use and machinery re- 
sources, crop production management practices, and govern- 
ment subsidies. The crop-level dataset was derived from the 
household survey and included input-output inventories for 
each crop grown during one year on each ﬁeld greater than 
1/30th ha (1/2 mu) on the 525 surveyed farms within a year. 
This dataset comprises information on cropping practices in 
1352 ﬁelds. The three datasets provide a basis for analyses 
on cropping practices and sustainability attributes of farms 
and crops in a typical agricultural county on the North China 
Plain. 
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ )

Speciﬁcations Table

Subject 
Agriculture science 
Speciﬁc subject area 
Crop diversity, Crop production, Management practice, Sustainability 
Data format 
Raw data 
Type of data 
CSV ﬁles ( n = 5): i) Village data, ii) Farm household data, iii) Crop data, iv) 
Codebook_village data, v) Codebook_household and crop data 
Tables and Figures 
How the data were acquired 
The data are in three datasets: (1) village dataset, (2) farm dataset, (3) crop 
dataset. The village-level data (dataset 1) was composed of two sources: 
yearbook [1] data and village cadres survey, including village Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) secretary, village monitor and village accountant. Data 
for datasets 2 and 3 were collected by conducting personal interviews using a 
structured questionnaire. We interviewed 525 households in Quzhou county 
on the North China Plain. These 525 households originated from 35 villages, 5 
villages from each of 7 village clusters identiﬁed by analysing dataset 1. The 
dataset consists of 505 valid observations after checking for missing values and 
potential errors. 
Description of data collection 
In the ﬁrst step, we grouped all 342 villages in Quzhou in eight clusters based 
on similar crop production and socio-economic characteristics according to 
yearbook data [1] and village cadres survey data. A random sample of ﬁve 
villages was selected for each of seven village types, excluding one semi-urban 
village type without crop production. We surveyed ﬁfteen farms from each of 
the 35 villages, including smallholder farms and business farms. We obtained 
the list of registered business farms from the local government and all the 
business farms present in the surveyed villages were included in the interview. 
There were up to two business farms per village, and all business farms in a 
village were included. Twenty-one of the 35 villages did not have business 
farms. A random selection was made from the remaining smallholder farms in 
a village to obtain a sample of ﬁfteen farms per village. A structured 
questionnaire was administered to all households. In this survey, we collected 
information on the household and agricultural practices on all plots greater 
than 0.5 mu (1/30th ha) on a farm. Perennial crops and greenhouse crops were 
excluded from the survey. 
Data source location 
Institution: College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, China 
Agricultural University 
City/Town/Region: Quzhou County of Handan City, Hebei Province 
Country: China 
Latitude and longitude: 36.58 and 114.83

( continued on next page )

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
3

Data accessibility 
Repository name: Mendeley Data 
Data identiﬁcation number: Doi: 10.17632/jp3v9859cx.1 
Direct URL to data: 
https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/jp3v9859cx/1

1. Value of the Data

• This dataset contains the ﬁrst publicly available data on cropping practices for a very wide 
range of crop systems (62 one-year cropping systems were identiﬁed) in a representative 
county on the North China Plain. The North China Plain is an area that is of prime importance 
for China’s wheat and maize grain production, but it also has important production of cotton 
and a vast range of minor crops. 
• The dataset with village characteristics and the associated typology results can be used to se- 
lect representative villages based on socio-economic data, crop patterns and crop production- 
related resources when further surveys are done in Quzhou. 
• The farm-level data are valuable for analyzing sustainability and input/poutput relationships 
of crop production in Quzhou as a representative village on the North China Plain. 
• Farm level data are furthermore valuable for analysing performance of farm management 
strategies at the farm household level in response to policy interventions, farm size, socioe- 
conomic conditions, and household demographics 
• The crop inventory data was collected for all crops grown within a year on each farm ﬁeld > 
0.5 mu (1/30th ha) operated by the household. So the farm level and crop level data can be 
combined to be used as a benchmark, and it can be used to analyze the production eﬃciency 
of farms. 
• The crop level data can be used to design new rotations to better meet stakeholder demands 
and sustainability objectives. 
• The datasets can be a reference source for making policies to promote crop production prac- 
tices that contribute to improved agricultural sustainability in high-input farming systems.

2. Objective

The objective of the household survey is to provide a comprehensive picture of crop produc- 
tion practices and rural livelihoods in Quzhou county on the North China Plain. The county, lo- 
cated in the center of the North China Plain ( Fig. 1 ), is representative of the North China Plain in 
terms of its land-use, production practices and sustainability challenges. It was selected in 2019 
as an agriculture green development (AGD) focus area [2] . The AGD program aims to explore 
the sustainability challenges, to promote a series of promising solutions and to share practical 
experiences across regions with similar conditions throughout China [3] . Speciﬁcally, we focused 
on which crops were grown, and how farmers cultivated these crops. Although the North China 
Plain is one of the food bowls in China, most previous studies focused on the main cropping 
system, double cropping of wheat and maize, in which wheat is sown in October and harvested 
in June the following year while maize is sown immediately after wheat harvest in June and 
harvested in October. Other crop production activities have not previously been described in 
detail.

3. Data Description

This data paper reports on three datasets in Quzhou county, covering village, farm house- 
hold, and crop levels. Data from the 2017 village yearbook, village cadre survey data, and vil- 
lage typology results were included in the village dataset. The farm household dataset provides

4 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Fig. 1. Map of the North China Plain. The green polygon in south Hebei is Quzhou county.

Table 1 
Deﬁnition of business farms and three subtypes of business farms included in the dataset.

Farm management models 
Characteristics

Business farm 
Business farms prioritize economic beneﬁts from marketing their farm 
produce. Business farms have a relatively large farm size (more than 3 
hectares per farm [3] ), and they are usually run by a professional manager. 
Business farms need to register with the local government to obtain a 
business license. 
Family farm 
Family farms are run by a family. They hire seasonal labour as needed and 
the farm size is mostly larger than 50 mu (3.3 hectares) [4] . 
Cooperative farm 
Cooperative farms typically consist of at least ﬁve family farms [5] 
investing together in machinery and wages for hired labour. 
Agricultural company 
Agricultural companies have the largest farm size. They employ a 
professional manager for marketing and sales [6] . Some agricultural 
companies have their own processing facilities.

information on data collected from 505 household surveys across 35 villages on various issues, 
including the households’ socioeconomics, crop production decision makers’ characteristics, and 
crop production information for each major plot ( > 0.5 mu) on the farm. There are two types of 
farm management in this dataset: the smallholder model and the business model. The business 
farms are divided into three subtypes: family farms, cooperative farms, and agricultural com- 
panies ( Table 1 ). Based on the data from the household survey, we generated a crop dataset 
which provides input-output data of all crops grown on the surveyed farms within a year. Five

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
5

Table 2 
Deﬁnition of ﬁve cropping system types covered in the dataset.

Cropping system type 
Characteristics 
Area 
percentage (%)

Single cropping 
A single crop is grown in one plot in one year. E.g. cotton. 
43.9 % 
Relay intercropping 
Relay intercropping entails growing two crop species in the 
same parcel, but the growing period of the two crops 
overlaps only partially. E.g. cotton/mung bean relay 
intercropping.

0.4 %

Double cropping 
Double cropping means harvesting two full crops in a 
calendar year in the same parcel and there is no overlap in 
growing period. E.g. wheat-maize double cropping.

53.8 %

Relay double cropping 
Relay double cropping includes three crops in a parcel in a 
year, including one crop with a long growing period and 
two crops with a short growing period. The latter two 
crops are planted as a double cropping and they are 
combined with the long growth period crops in a strip 
intercrop. E.g. cotton-watermelon-cauliﬂower where cotton 
is the long season crop and watermelon and cauliﬂower 
are grown in the same strip after each other.

0.6 %

Triple cropping 
Triple cropping covers three crops grown after each other 
in one year. E.g. a sequence of three cabbage crops in the 
same ﬁeld in one year.

1.3 %

cropping system types ( Table 2 ) and 28 crop species are included in our dataset. Two codebooks 
are available as supplemental ﬁles. The ﬁrst, Codebook_village data , includes units, descriptions, 
survey questions and the sources for the variables in the village dataset. The second, Code- 
book_household and crop data , includes units, descriptions, and survey questions for the variables 
in the farm household dataset and crop dataset. The following sections present each dataset in 
more detail.

3.1. Village dataset

The village dataset comprises 342 records, one for each village in Quzhou, and 16 variables. 
Fifteen variables were used to build a village typology and the result of the village typology is 
the 16th variable. The ﬁfteen key variables represented three aspects: village structure (e.g. pop- 
ulation, number of households), area of a few main crops (wheat, maize, cotton, vegetables and 
oil crops) within a village, and crop production-related resources (e.g. land area, irrigatable land, 
distance to city). Seven variables were derived from the village cadre survey, and the remaining 
eight were extracted from the yearbook [1] ( Table 3 ). The village cadre survey was conducted 
in January 2018. These village cadres included the village Chinese Communist Party (CCP) sec- 
retary, a village monitor, and an accountant. These cadres collect and manage village statistics 
and are therefore a primary source of information. The village cadre survey focused on villages’ 
resources endowment, agricultural production structure (crop production and livestock produc- 
tion), agricultural pollutants, and rural waste management. Only the variables related to crop 
production were included in the village dataset.

Fig. 2 shows the percentage of arable land per village that was cultivated with winter wheat, 
maize, cotton, vegetables, and oil crops, which are the main crops cultivated in Quzhou. There 
was large heterogeneity in crop proportions across the county. For instance, vegetable and oil 
crops were widely cultivated in only a few villages. The areas of maize, cotton, vegetables, and 
oil crops were sourced from yearbook data, and the wheat area was sourced from the village 
cadre survey. It was recorded in both the yearbook and the village cadre data that crop pro- 
duction information applied to the year 2017. Thirty villages did not have wheat area data since 
twelve villages were excluded from the cadre survey because the number of households was too

6 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Table 3 
Village dataset variables.

Variable 
Unit 
Description 
Source

Structure 
Household number 
Number 
Total number of households 
Yearbook 
Smallholder farmland 
% 
Percentage of arable land operated by 
smallholder farms to total arable land

Village cadre survey

Family farms 
Number 
Total number of family farms 
Village cadre survey 
Cooperative farms 
Number 
Total number of cooperative farms 
Village cadre survey 
Crop pattern 
Area with winter wheat 
% 
Percent arable land with wheat 1 
Village cadre survey 
Area with maize 
% 
Percent arable land with maize 1 
Yearbook 
Area with vegetables 
% 
Percent arable land with vegetables 
Yearbook 
Area with cotton 
% 
Percent arable land with cotton 
Yearbook 
Area with oil crops 
% 
Percent arable land with oil crops 
Yearbook 
Resources 
Arable land 
ha 
Area of arable land 
Yearbook 
Irrigatable land 
% 
Percentage of irrigated land (includes 
well irrigated and surface water 
irrigated) to total arable land

Yearbook

Off-farm labour ratio 
% 
The ratio of off-farm labour to total 
labour

Village cadre survey

Average income 
CNY capita−1

year−1

Average net income per capita per year 
Village cadre survey

Distance to the city center 
km 
The distance from the village council to 
the city council of Quzhou via roads

Village cadre survey

Distance to road net 
km 
The distance from the village council to 
the road net. The road net, which 
includes multiple highways, serves as a 
transportation network connecting 
urban and rural areas.

Village cadre survey

1 Wheat and maize are usually cultivated in a double cropping sequence. Hence, the land can be cultivated twice in a 
year if the land is cultivated with wheat-maize double cropping. Due to the existence of double and even triple cropping, 
the crop percentages can add up to more than 100 %.

small (below 100), or because of a high degree of urbanization. Another 18 questionnaires were 
excluded due to low quality.

3.2. Farm household dataset

The farm household dataset reports farm-level data and was collected in Quzhou County 
in July 2020. The household data contained 505 records, including data from 486 smallholder 
farms, 14 family farms, and ﬁve cooperative farms. A structured questionnaire was administered 
to all farm decision-makers in person to collect crop production activity data during a one-year 
cropping cycle (June 2019 to June 2020). There were four parts to the questionnaire. The answers 
to the questions in part 1 of the questionnaire resulted in 60 columns in the resulting dataﬁle. 
Demographic information is divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part is information on all house- 
hold members, including the number of household members, their age and sex, occupation, and 
off-farm income. The second sub-part is information about the person who makes the farming 
decisions, and we asked about their farming experience, and the number of schooling years. The 
answers to the questions in part 2 resulted in 17 columns and describes resources, such as land 
allocation and self-owned machinery. A farm’s resources include allocated lands, 1 rental lands, 2

1 In China, the rural land is collectively owned by villagers and all of the cropland is allocated for use to the rural 
population on a pro-rata basis. This cropland is allocated land.

2 Some villagers choose not to manage part or all of their allocated cropland, e.g. because of their age, and rent it out 
to earn income. This cropland is rental land.

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
7

Fig. 2. Percentage of the arable land in Quzhou, cultivated with different crops: (a) wheat, (b) maize, (c) cotton, (d) 
vegetables, and (e) oil crops. In Quzhou, the typical oil crops are peanuts, soybean, and sunﬂower grown for oil. Note 
that wheat and maize are predominantly cultivated in a winter wheat-maize double cropping system.

and rented lands 3 for every cropping system. A detailed input-output inventory for crop produc- 
tion is provided in Part 3, which consists of 864 columns. Additionally, Part 4 includes data on 
subsidies and land leasing related to crop production. The questions of this part has 9 columns. 
Results of the survey indicate that the farmers used ﬁve types of one-year cropping system: 
single cropping, relay-intercropping, double cropping, relay-double cropping, and triple cropping 
( Table 2 ). Double cropping and single cropping occupied approximately 54 % and 44 % area of 
our sample, respectively, and the other three cropping systems occupied a small area percentage. 
In our data set, the dominant double cropping was wheat-maize double cropping (51 % of the 
area). The dominant crop species in single cropping was cotton (23 % of the total area).

Table 4 describes the critical socioeconomic characteristics of households and decision- 
makers. The number of household members of business farms has thirteen missing values since 
these farms were not run by a family and were operated by several families.

Fig. 3 shows the distribution of farm size as reported by survey respondents. It shows that the 
mean farm size of sampled farms was 1.23 ha per farm and the median farm size was 0.67 ha 
per farm. The smallholder farms’ mean farm size was 0.71 ha per farm, and the median was

3 Some villagers want to enlarge their cropland to earn more money. They rent cropland from other villagers. This 
cropland is rented land.

8 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Table 4 
Socioeconomics characteristics of the respondents.

Variable 
Category 
Frequency 
(% of valid)

Valid 
Missing

Household characteristics 
Household size 
1–5 
366 (74.4 %) 
492 
(97.4 %)

13 
(2.6 %) 
6–10 
124 (25.2 %) 
Above 10 
2 (0.4 %) 
Off-farm work 
Participating 
272 (53.9 %) 
505 
(100.0 %)

0 
(0.0 %) 
Not participating 
233 (46.1 %) 
Characteristics of farming 
decision maker 
Gender 
Male 
374 (74.0 %) 
505 
(100.0 %)

0 
(0.0 %) 
Female 
131 (26.0 %) 
Age 
Youth (18–35) 
6 (1.2 %) 
505 
(100.0 %)

0 
(0.0 %) 
Adult (36–60) 
24 8 (4 9.1 %) 
Elderly ( > 60) 
251 (49.7 %) 
Level of education 
No schooling 
137 (27.1 %) 
505 
(100.0 %)

0 
(0.0 %) 
Primary 
146 (28.9 %) 
Middle 
172 (34.1 %) 
Senior 
46 (9.1 %) 
Bachelor 
4 (0.8 %) 
Years of farming experience 
1–10 
25 (4.9 %) 
505 
(100.0 %)

0 
(0.0 %) 
10–20 
49 (9.7 %) 
20–30 
114 (22.6 %) 
> 30 
317 (62.8 %)

Table 5 
Number of farms with one, two, three or more than three cropping systems. For each case, the table lists in how many 
cases speciﬁc cropping systems (rows) are present on the farm. For instance, of 212 farms have two cropping systems, 
174 had cotton, and 191 had winter wheat-maize double cropping.

Cropping systems

Number of cropping systems per farm

1 ( n = 228) 
2 ( n = 212) 
3 ( n = 45)

> 3 
( n = 20)

Cotton 
28 
174 
37 
11 
Stevia 
4 
17 
11 
5 
Chili 
3 
5 
9 
6 
Maize 
4 
10 
2 
3 
Vegetable 
0 
2 
6 
2 
Other single cropping 
2 
8 
8 
6 
Cotton/mung bean 
0 
6 
5 
3 
Cotton/ watermelon 
0 
0 
1 
1 
Winter wheat-maize 
186 
191 
37 
12 
Vegetable-Vegetable 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Maize-vegetable 
0 
3 
3 
5 
Winter wheat-vegetable 
0 
2 
1 
1 
Other double cropping 
0 
6 
5 
8 
Relay double cropping 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Vegetable-vegetable-vegetable 
1 
1 
13 
7 
Vegetable-maize-vegetable 
0 
0 
3 
0

0.63 ha per farm. The business farms’ mean farm size was 14.5 ha per farm, and the median 
was 13.3 ha per farm. Eighty-six out of 505 farms (17 %) rented out their croplands to others 
and about 22 % of farms rented in croplands from other farms.

Table 5 presents the number of cropping systems cultivated per farm and lists the cropping 
systems. Forty-ﬁve percent of farms grew only one cropping system, usually double cropping of 
wheat and maize. A total of 212 of the 505 farms cultivated two cropping systems, with wheat- 
maize double cropping and single cotton being the most commonly used. In 12 % of farms,

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
9

Fig. 3. Farm size distribution as reported by respondents for all farms (a), smallholder farms (b) and business farms (c) 
The black vertical dashed lines indicate the median farm size and the red vertical dashed lines indicate the mean farm 
size.

there were more than two cropping systems. Vegetable-based cropping systems were more often 
found on farms that had at least three cropping systems than on farms that had only one or two 
cropping systems.

3.3. Crop dataset

The crop dataset was derived from the household survey and applied to the period from 
June 2019 to June 2020. The dataset provided recalled ﬁeld-level data with 112 columns and 
1352 records. The dataset presents detailed crop input-output inventory and crop management 
data. The input data includes the quantity and costs of seeds, ﬁlm mulch, fertilizers, pesticide, 
irrigation and fuel consumption of each machine, costs of hired labour and purchased machinery 
service, and the labour consumption of every management practice, including soil preparation, 
sowing, fertilizer application, pesticide spraying, weeding, harvesting, and other management 
practices. The output data contains the average crop yield, reported by farmers, as an average

10 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Fig. 4. The number of cultivated crops by respondents.

over all ﬁelds 4 of a crop on the farm, and the farm-gate price for every crop. The management 
includes the timing of sowing and harvesting and application frequency of fertilizers, irrigation, 
pesticides and weeding, as well as fertilizer type and quantity. With regards to pesticide spray- 
ing, we distinguished between herbicides, insecticdes and fungicides; for each category, we col- 
lected the information on treatment frequency. For intercropping, the farmers could provide the 
occupied percentage of every crop component in strips.

Fig. 4 provides information on the cultivated crop species and their records in the dataset. 
Twenty-eight crop species were cultivated on the interviewed farms, but only nine crops had ten 
or more records in the crop dataset. Maize, winter wheat, and cotton were the most prevalent 
crop species grown in the area.

4. Experimental Design, Materials and Methods

Before doing the household survey, we created a village typology based on already available 
yearbook data on the area of a few main crops in each village of Quzhou county and additional 
information from a village cadre survey done in 2018. Developing this typology allowed us to 
target the effort of household survey across the main agricultural village types in Quzhou, to 
ensure the representativeness of the sample, and avoid that important village types were under- 
represented or time would be spent on survey in villages with no or marginal agricultural activ- 
ity. Creating a typology thus allows us to deal with heterogeneity and to develop a more tailored 
approach for the household survey [7] . For the purpose of selecting representative villages and

4 A ﬁeld is a parcel of open land with one planted crop or planted with an intercrop. In Quzhou, farmers usually 
cultivate the same crop in multiple ﬁelds, and those ﬁelds are scattered across the farm.

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
11

Fig. 5. The dendrogram from hierarchical clustering on 308 villages of Quzhou.

gaining a broader perspective of crop activities in Quzhou, all 342 villages in the county were 
grouped based on their structure, crop patterns, and resources related to crop production. Eight 
village types were distinguished ( Fig. 5 ).

4.1. Selection of typology variables

Prior to the farm household survey, a village typology was made based on the village dataset. 
Considering the classiﬁcation objective and the available data (amount and accuracy), ﬁfteen 
variables were calculated from structural variables, crop patterns, and resources ( Table 3 ). The 
resource variables represented land (arable land), water (irrigatable water), labour (off-farm 
labour ratio), ﬁnance (average income) and market (distance to the city center and distance 
to the road net). Of 342 villages, 308 were retained for typology analysis because 12 villages 
were not surveyed in the village cadre survey, 18 villages had low-quality questionnaires; these 
villages were assigned the type “NA”. Four villages having inconsistent data between yearbook 
data and surveyed data were assigned the type “Outlier”.

4.2. Multivariate analysis

The typology was generated sequentially using multivariate analysis and cluster analysis: 
multivariate analysis was used to identify discriminating variables, and cluster analysis was used

12 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

to group villages into homogeneous types. All analyses were done with the ade4 package for R 
version 4.1.0 [8] . Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to reduce the database into non- 
correlated components based on all ﬁfteen quantitative variables. The number of principal com- 
ponents (PC’s) was determined by considering two criteria. The cumulative variance explained 
by the selected principal components should be > 60 %, and all principal components’ eigenval- 
ues were greater than one [8] . As a result, we found seven principal components that explained 
66 % of the variance among villages. Ward’s minimum variance method was used to perform 
a hierarchical cluster analysis using the PCA output in the form of a reduced dataset based on 
the retained PC’s. A maximum average silhouette was used to determine the number of clus- 
ters [9] and seven types of villages were determined. Village type 1 comprised a higher num- 
ber of villages than the other types. Fig. 5 shows that two subclusters were connected to the 
biggest cluster in the dendrogram. A second typology analysis was conducted to differentiate 
the largest clusters. The same classiﬁcation variables and methods were used to split type 1 into 
two subtypes. Fig. 6 shows the relationships between village characteristics and village types 
after PCA and clustering analysis. The distribution of village types across Quzhou is illustrated 
in Fig. 7 .

4.3. Description of village types

Type 1. Small households and small arable land with cereal-based cropping system (119 villages) 
In comparison to the other types, this village type had few households (the mean was 192) 
and less arable land per village (84 ha). The type was subdivided into two subtypes. Farmers in 
village type 1–1 (sample size of 88 village) allocated signiﬁcantly less land to vegetables than 
farmers in village type 1–2 (sample size of 31 villages) ( Fig. 8 ). 
Type 2. Large arable land with multiple farm management models (8 villages) 
It was the smaller of the two clusters, with a small proportion of off-farm labour (37 %) and 
a large area of arable land per village (250 ha). This type had the greatest number of business 
farms, and the proportion of the village area occupied by smallholder farms was the smallest 
(77 %) among the villages ( Fig. 8 ). 
Type 3. Medium number of households and medium arable land with cereal-based cropping sys- 
tem (75 villages) 
This was the second largest cluster, with a medium number of households per village (378) 
and an average area of arable land per village (173 ha). The cultivated crops were primarily 
maize and wheat, and about 60 % of labourers had other employment ( Fig. 8 ). 
Type 4. Close to market and low off-farm labour with substantial vegetable production (60 vil- 
lages) 
Among the villages, type 4 had the smallest distance to the city center and road net. With 
96 ha of average arable land per village, this group allocated less than 48 % to wheat cultivation 
and about 20 % to vegetables grown as arable crop. There was a relatively little off-farm labour 
in this village type ( Fig. 8 ). 
Type 5. High urbanization and nearly no crop production (7 villages) 
The type 5 settlements were the closest to the city center, and nearly no land was used for 
agriculture. Approximately seventy percent of the labour force worked off-farm ( Fig. 8 ). Villages 
in this cluster were not included in farm survey. 
Type 6. Large households and large arable land with far from the city center (17 villages) 
In type 6, there were more households per village (786 on average) and arable land area 
of the village was greater (328 ha). This type was the farthest from the city center (28 km on 
average), and maize and wheat were the main crops ( Fig. 8 ). 
Type 7. Medium arable land with diversiﬁed cropping systems (22 villages) 
This village type had the highest areas allocated to cotton and oil crops (47 % for cotton and 
8 % for oil crops) ( Fig. 8 ).

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
13

Fig. 6. Principal component analysis of the associations between village characteristics and villages. The ﬁlled circles 
represent villages and different colors represent village types. The arrows represent village characteristic variables, e.g. 
city center (distance to the city center), road (distance to road net), household (number of households per village), 
off-farm labour (off-farm labour ratio), income (average income), area (arable land), irrigatable ratio (irrigatable land), 
wheat (area with wheat), maize (area with maize), cotton (area with cotton), oil crop (area with oil crops), vegetable 
(area with vegetable), small farm (smallholder farm), cooperative (cooperative farm), and family farm. For a description 
of variables characterizing the villages, see Table 3 . Village types: 1–1 Small villages with small farms, mainly cereal- 
based ( n = 88); 1–2 Small villages with small farms, like type 1 but with more vegetables ( n = 31); 2. Large villages 
with more business farms ( n = 8); 3. Medium-sized villages, mainly cereal-based ( n = 75); 4. Villages close to the city 
and with high proportion vegetables ( n = 60); 5. Urbanized villages with almost no crop production (excluded from 
farm survey) ( n = 7); 6. Large villages with large farms, far from city, mostly cereal-based ( n = 17); 7. Medium-sized 
villages with diversiﬁed cropping systems, including cotton and oil crops) ( n = 22). (For interpretation of the references 
to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

14 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Fig. 7. Village types distribution in Quzhou county. Quzhou county includes ten townships (delineated by bold black 
borders) and 342 villages (delineated by light grey borders). Township names are listed on the map. Coloring of villages 
indicates the village type: 1–1 Small villages with small farms, mainly cereal-based ( n = 88); 1–2 Small villages with 
small farms, like type 1 but with more vegetables ( n = 31); 2. Large villages with more business farms ( n = 8); 3. 
Medium-sized villages, mainly cereal-based ( n = 75); 4. Villages close to the city and with high proportion vegetables 
( n = 60); 5. Urbanized villages with almost no crop production (excluded from farm survey) ( n = 7); 6. Large villages 
with large farms, far from city, mostly cereal-based ( n = 17); 7. Medium-sized villages with diversiﬁed cropping systems, 
including cotton and oil crops) ( n = 22). (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)

4.4. Use of the typology

The typology was used to select representative villages for a farm household survey that was 
conducted in Quzhou county from July to August 2020 using stratiﬁed random sampling. Five 
villages were selected at random from each of seven clusters (the highly urbanized cluster 5 
was excluded) of villages having crop production. A total of ﬁfteen farms were identiﬁed from 
each selected village. The list of business farms was provided by the local government. All family

Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269
15

Fig. 8. Village features for the seven village types and two sub-types identiﬁed by typology. The white diamond dots 
represent the mean and the black dots represent outlier values. Oil crops are: peanut, soybean and oil sunﬂowers. Village 
types: 1–1 Small villages with small farms, mainly cereal-based ( n = 88); 1–2 Small villages with small farms, like type 
1 but with more vegetables ( n = 31); 2. Large villages with more business farms ( n = 8); 3. Medium-sized villages, 
mainly cereal-based ( n = 75); 4. Villages close to the city and with high proportion vegetables ( n = 60); 5. Urbanized 
villages with almost no crop production (excluded from farm survey) ( n = 7); 6. Large villages with large farms, far from 
city, mostly cereal-based ( n = 17); 7. Medium-sized villages with diversiﬁed cropping systems, including cotton and oil 
crops) ( n = 22).

farms and cooperative farms were always included if they were present in a village. The remain- 
ing smallholder farms were randomly selected to obtain a sample of 15 farms per village.

Limitations

The village cadres survey and household survey were conducted in a single county on the 
North China Plain. Therefore it may not accurately reﬂect the situation in the whole North China 
Plain. 
In the survey, farmers found it hard to recall some detailed management data, such as culti- 
var of crops, ingredients and content of pesticides, and the precise date of fertilizer application, 
pesticide spraying, and irrigation. In the future, some farmers in this survey could be further 
tracked to collect more detailed data on management practices.

Ethics Statements

After consultation of the ethics experts of Wageningen University and China Agricultural Uni- 
versity, we obtained the approval from the local competent authority represented by the Quzhou 
Experiment Station. All farmers participated in the survey voluntarily. All participants agreed to 
the survey and the use of the data for non-proﬁt research purposes. All data were collected 
anonymously.

16 
Z. Xu, F. Li and J. Cheng et al. / Data in Brief 53 (2024) 110269

Data Availability

Survey data on livelihoods and inputs and outputs of crop production activities in Quzhou 
county on the North China Plain (Original data) (Mendeley Data).

CRediT Author Statement

Zhan Xu: Conceptualization, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – review & editing; Fan Li: 
Data curation, Resources; Jiali Cheng: Investigation, Data curation; Zhengyuan Liang: Investi- 
gation, Data curation; Jeroen C.J. Groot: Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing; 
Wopke van der Werf: Supervision, Writing – review & editing; Chaochun Zhang: Supervision.

Acknowledgments

This work received ﬁnancial support from the Cooperative Project of Chinese Academy of En- 
gineering (2020-FJ-XZ-8) and China Scholarship Council (CSC) (grant number is No. 201913043 ) 
and Hainan University. In particular, we would like to thank Nico Heerink for the valuable sug- 
gestions. We thanked Dongsheng Li, Shuai Han, Yingying Wang and Jiahui Ji for the farm survey 
data collection.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal rela- 
tionships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

References

[1] National Bureau of Statistics of ChinaChina Statistics Yearbook, Chinese Statistics Press, Beijing, 2017 (in Chinese) . 
[2] Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of ChinaList of National Agricultural Green Devel- 
opment Focus Areas for the Second Round (in Chinese), 2019 . 
[3] J. Shen, Q. Zhu, X. Jiao, H. Ying, H. Wang, X. Wen, W. Xu, T. Li, W. Cong, X. Liu, Y. Hou, Z. Cui, O. Oenema, W.J. Davies, 
F. Zhang, Agriculture green development: a model for China and the world, Front. Agric. Sci. Eng. 7 (2020) 5–13 . 
[4] J. Huang, J. Ding, Institutional innovation and policy support to facilitate small-scale farming transformation in China, 
Agric. Econ. 47 (2016) 227–237 . 
[5] M. Shen, J. Shen, Evaluating the cooperative and family farm programs in China: a rural governance perspective, Land 
Use Policy 79 (2018) 240–250 . 
[6] Y. Yu, Y. Hu, B. Gu, S. Reis, L. Yang, Reforming smallholder farms to mitigate agricultural pollution, Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. Int. 29 (2021) 13869–13880 . 
[7] S. Alvarez, C.J. Timler, M. Michalscheck, W. Paas, K. Descheemaeker, P. Tittonell, J.A. Andersson, J.C. Groot, Captur- 
ing farm diversity with hypothesis-based typologies: an innovative methodological framework for farming system 
typology development, PLoS ONE 13 (2018) e0194757 . 
[8] R. Core Team, R: A Language and Environment For Statistical Computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 
2021 . 
[9] K.S. Kuivanen, S. Alvarez, M. Michalscheck, S. Adjei-Nsiah, S. Descheemaeker, S. Mellon-Bedi, J.C.J. Groot, Characteriz- 
ing the diversity of smallholder farming systems and their constraints and opportunities for innovation: a case study 
from the Northern Region, Ghana, NJAS 78 (1) (2016) 153–166 .