Improved manure management moves trade-off and synergy relationships 
among environmental indicators in desirable directions

Qingbo Qu a,b,c,d, Jeroen C.J. Groot c, Keqiang Zhang d,e,*

a College of Agriculture and Biological Science, Dali University, Dali, Yunnan 671003, China
b Team for Agroecology in Erhai Lake Watershed, Dali University, Dali, Yunnan 671003, China
c Farming Systems Ecology Group, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen 6700 AK, the Netherlands
d Dali Yunnan, Agricultural Ecosystem, National Observation and Research Station, Dali 671004, China
e Agro-environmental Protection Institute, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Tianjin 300191, China

H I G H L I G H T S
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T

• Improved manure management and 
crop-dairy integration enhance nutrient 
circularity in intensive dairy farms.
• Combining manure technologies greatly 
reduces N losses.
• Manure management optimizes N vola­

tilization, soil N losses, and soil organic 
matter balance.
• Improved manure practices alone are 
insufficient to address N surplus in high- 
density dairies.

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Editor: Paul Crosson

Keywords:
Manure management
Crop-dairy integration
Feed self-sufficiency
FarmDESIGN
Multi-objective optimization

A B S T R A C T

CONTEXT: Dairy production systems with a high stocking density are strongly dependent on external feed re­
sources and concentrate nutrients in manure on a small surface area, thus causing environmental challenges. 
Both improved manure management and integration of crop-dairy production have been proposed as ways to 
reduce nutrient losses and improve sustainability of intensive dairy production. However, the potential inter­
active relationships between these two options are rarely investigated.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate how different manure management technologies influence nutrient 
losses at manure management and farm levels and how manure management impacts farm multi-objective 
optimization results for more integrated crop-dairy production.
METHODS: A whole farm model (FarmDESIGN) extended with a manure management module (FarmM3) was 
used to simulate an intensive mixed crop-dairy farm with a herd of 66 cows and 9.6 ha of crop area. The 
optimization aimed to improve farm environmental performance, increase feed self-sufficiency and food 
production.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that individual manure management technologies were 
insufficient to reduce nitrogen (N) losses from manure management chains due to compensatory losses, whereas

* Corresponding author at: Dali Yunnan, Agricultural Ecosystem, National Observation and Research Station, Dali 671004, China.

E-mail address: keqiangzhang68@163.com (K. Zhang).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Agricultural Systems

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2024.104170
Received 29 May 2024; Received in revised form 27 September 2024; Accepted 28 October 2024

Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

Available online 6 November 2024 
0308-521X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ).

combinations of slurry solid-liquid separation, covered storage of solid and liquid fractions, and improved 
manure application could remarkably reduce N losses by 46 to 58 % and increase manure N use efficiencies by 
more than 30 %. Improved manure management did not influence total N losses at farm level without decreasing 
livestock density. Multi-objective optimization showed that improved manure management did not eliminate 
trade-offs or synergies among objectives but did affect the positions and the slopes of the solution frontiers 
between objectives. Differences between solution frontiers of alternative farm configurations in terms of N 
volatilization, soil N losses and soil organic matter (OM) balance indicated that manure management chains 
(MMCs) could be designed effectively to optimize these objectives.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study confirmed the value of improved manure management and integrated crop-dairy 
production in reducing N losses and improving farm nutrient use efficiency. For intensive dairy farms with 
limited land availability, future studies should focus on recoupling crop and dairy production at regional scales to 
create more sustainable and resilient food production systems.

1. Introduction

1.1. Intensive dairy production

Dairy farming has intensified and specialized over the past few de­
cades (FAO, 2018). With high stocking rates and large external feed 
inputs, intensive dairy farming systems are typically characterized by 
high productivity and profitability but also negative site-specific envi­
ronmental impacts (Clay et al., 2020). Environmental problems, such as 
greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions, nutrient surpluses and eutro­
phication of ecosystems, have gained worldwide attention (Rotz et al., 
2006; Oenema et al., 2007). Poor on-farm manure management and the 
spatial decoupling of crop and dairy farms were perceived as the major 
causes of nutrient losses from intensive confinement dairy farms (Bai 
et al., 2013; Chadwick et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2023). With a large 
amount of excreted manure but limited available grassland or cropland 
to utilize the produced manure, manure has become a burden for 
intensive confinement dairy farms. Additionally, due to the high live­
stock density, the strong reliance on external feeds of these intensive 
confinement dairy farms has resulted in very low levels of nutrient 
circularity and use efficiency. Strategies to reduce nutrient losses and to 
improve nutrient use efficiency have been pointed out to involve 
improving manure management and by recoupling crop and dairy pro­
duction (Oenema and Tamminga, 2005; Chadwick et al., 2020).

1.2. Improved manure management

Emission mitigation measures and manure treatment technologies 
have been developed to reduce nutrient losses from manure manage­
ment facilities. For instance, covering of manure storages, slurry acidi­
fication and dilution, and injection of liquid manure were used to reduce 
ammonia emissions. Anaerobic digestion, solid-liquid separation and 
composting could contribute to mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions 
and facilitate manure nutrient management by producing alternative 
manure products such as anaerobic digestate, separated liquid and solid 
fractions, and compost (Foged et al., 2011; Sommer et al., 2013). 
However, devising a single mitigation measure on a single loss pathway 
has led to pollution swapping by increased losses of other compounds 
(De Vries et al., 2015a). It was reported that the reduced ammonia 
emissions by covering slurry storage and by injection of liquid manure 
resulted in an increased nitrous oxide emission (Sommer and Hutchings, 
2001; Berg et al., 2006). Moreover, the reduced gas emission at previous 
stages might lead to increased losses at later manure management stages 
(Shah et al., 2013). Considering the pollution swapping among nutrient 
loss pathways and compensatory losses among manure management 
technologies and different stages in the manure management chain, a 
combination of different manure management technologies has been 
proven more efficient to reduce nutrient losses from the whole manure 
management chains (Rotz et al., 2006; Hou et al., 2015; Sajeev et al., 
2018). However, the quantitative effects of improved manure manage­
ment on nutrient use efficiency at farm level are rarely investigated. 
With more conserved nutrients in manure products, fewer nutrient

inputs from synthetic fertilizers and a larger area of crop- or grassland 
might be needed to utilize these nutrients. Thus, for intensive confine­
ment dairy farms, the recoupling of crop and dairy production could be a 
promising solution to reduce nutrient surplus and to increase nutrient 
circularity and use efficiency (Peyraud et al., 2014; Schut et al., 2021).

1.3. Reintegration of crop and dairy production

In integrated or recoupled crop and dairy systems, the manure pro­
duced by cows is used as a source of fertilizer for the crops, which in turn 
provide feeds for the livestock. These closed-loop systems allow for the 
efficient use of nutrients, reducing the need for synthetic fertilizers and 
limiting the demand for imported feeds (Ryschawy et al., 2012; Marton 
et al., 2016). Although the value of integrated crop-livestock systems in 
terms of reducing detrimental environmental impacts has been 
confirmed, studies have highlighted the necessity to consider food pro­
duction of these systems (Lemaire et al., 2014; Puech et al., 2023), 
especially at farm scale, since the issue of increasing nutrient recycling 
by crop-livestock integration raises questions about the use of agricul­
tural land and resource allocation between food crops, feed and animal 
products, particularly the role of intermediate resources such as fodder 
for animal feed (Barbieri et al., 2022). Thus, a strategic plan and design 
for integrated crop-livestock systems is highly vital to improve nutrient 
use efficiency and circularity, to increase feed self-sufficiency without 
compromising food production.

1.4. Whole farm models

Given the strong interactions among different farm components (i.e., 
animals, manure, soils and crops) of integrated crop and dairy farms, 
whole farm models can be powerful means to redesign crop and dairy 
systems to balance supply and demand of feedstuff and manure, and to 
provide ex-ante assessments of performance of integrated crop-dairy 
systems. In this study, we will apply a whole farm model, the FarmDE­
SIGN model, developed by Groot et al. (2012) to redesign farming sys­
tems by balancing crop-livestock interactions. This model can identify 
complicated interactions among farm components, support the explo­
ration of alternative farm configurations using a Pareto-based multi- 
objective optimization algorithm, and provide redesign plans for 
improving farm nutrient use efficiency, increasing self-sufficiency of 
feed and guarantee food production. With a linked external manure 
management module (Qu et al., 2023), it also allows the investigation of 
the effects of improved manure management practices on nutrient losses 
and farm nutrient use efficiency.

1.5. Objectives

This study aims to investigate alternative farm management prac­
tices to improve nutrient use efficiency of intensive confinement dairy 
farms. Using the extended FarmDESIGN model, we first evaluate the 
impacts of various improved manure management practices on nutrient 
losses and farm nutrient use efficiency. Then we explore alternative farm

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

2

configurations to further increase nutrient circularity by integrating 
crop and dairy production based on Pareto-based multi-objective opti­
mization. Lastly, the potential impacts of improved manure manage­
ment chains on designing and optimizing plans for integrated crop and 
dairy farms is investigated.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Case study farm

A mixed dairy-crop farm in an agri-environmental scientific obser­
vation experimental station in Dali, in the province of Yunnan, China 
was selected as a case study. The region has experienced significant 
environmental challenges, particularly the degradation of Erhai Lake's 
water quality, primarily due to nutrient runoff from chemical fertilizers 
and the expansion of intensive dairy farming. To counter these issues, 
local policies have increasingly advocated for the use of organic fertil­
izers and the integration of crop and dairy farming systems, aiming to 
promote sustainable agricultural practices.

At this farm, the dairy herd consisted of 66 animals, including 6 
calves, 18 heifers and 42 milking cows. Heifers were kept on the grazed 
pasture for 245 days during spring, summer and part of autumn. Milking 
cows and calves were kept in an open barn throughout the whole year. 
Dung and urine excreted on the pastures were kept on the pasture 
without collection. Excreta produced in the barn were collected sepa­
rately with solid manure being sold off-farm and liquid manure being 
stored in an underground tank for a period of two months before being 
applied to fields.

The total cultivated farm area was 9.5 ha, with 3.5 ha for fava-bean 
and rice rotation, 1.5 ha for annual ryegrass, 1.5 ha for barley and maize 
rotation, and 3 ha for alfalfa and rape rotation. The harvested rice and 
rapeseed were sold and other crop products were used as animal feed or 
bedding. Additionally, large amounts of bedding materials and feeds

were imported into the farm. Table 1 presents the annual amounts of 
imported feeds and bedding materials in the original farm, which were 
estimated based on the data provided by the farmer.

Given the limited grazing area and the high potential for nutrient 
losses through leaching and runoff, we revised the farm configuration 
with no grazing by heifers and keeping all of the animals in the open 
barn throughout the whole year. We also improved the herd structure by 
replacing dairy cows at a rate of 25 %. Correspondingly, we revised the 
amount of feed intake to meet animal requirements (Table 1). To in­
crease nutrient use efficiency and circularity within the farm, we 
assumed that all produced manure is applied within the farm. The 
modified farm was taken as the baseline farm and as the starting point 
for farm optimization.

2.2. FarmDESIGN model

To evaluate the farm's performance comprehensively in terms of 
agronomic and environmental indicators, we utilized the FarmDESIGN 
model. This model is a bio-economic whole farm model that supports 
evaluation of mixed crop-livestock farm performance comprehensively 
with various agronomic, environmental and economic indicators (Groot 
et al., 2012). It can be used to simulate flows of organic matter (OM), 
carbon (C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) to, through 
and from farm components (crop-animal-manure-soil) on an annual 
basis. Based on a Pareto-based multi-objective optimization algorithm, 
this model also enables redesigning more sustainable farming systems 
by exploring alternative farm configurations of balancing different farm 
components interactions. We used an extended version of the model 
with a flexible modular manure management model (FarmM3) as 
detailed by Qu et al. (2023).

The FarmDESIGN model estimates the amount of manure dry matter 
produced (DMManure; kg) based on the amount of feed dry matter sup­
plied to animals (DMAnimalFeed for each feed p; kg), corrected for feed loss

Table 1 
Overview of variables in the original farm, baseline farm, farm scenario A (aiming to optimize livestock number on a 9.5 ha crop area), and farm scenario B (aiming to 
increase nutrient circularity by integrating more crop area) of the case study farm. The columns labeled Minimum and Maximum indicate the allowed range of 
variation in the optimization procedure for variables used as decision variables. The term ‘External’ refers to feeds or bedding materials that are imported from outside 
the farm.

Description
Original
Baseline
Scenario A
Scenario B

Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum

Number of animals kept on the farm
Dairy cows
42
42
12
42
–
–
Replacement Rate
–
0.25
0.15
0.35
–
–
Heifers
18
10
–
–
–
–
Calves
6
10
–
–
–
–

Areas of crop in rotation, ha

Bean-Rice
3.5
3.5
3
9.5
3
45
Ryegrass
1.5
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.5
1.5
Barley-Maize
1.5
1.5
0
3.0
0
3
Alfalfa-Rape
3
3
0
9.5
0
10
Alfalfa-Rice
0
0
0
0
0
45
Bean-Maize
0
0
0
0
0
45
Chinese cabbage-Maize
0
0
0
0
0
45
Asparagus lettuc-Rice
0
0
0
0
0
45
Amount of external feeds, kg DM per year
Alfalfa silage
134,558
134,558
0
134,558
0
134,558
Bean Straw
10,000
10,000
0
10,000
0
10,000
Concentrate
80,942
80,942
0
80,942
0
80,942
Concentrate2
20,000
10,000
0
10,000
0
10,000
Maize straw silage
0
0
0
15,000
0
15,000
Amount of bedding supplied to animals, kg per day

Calves
2.5
2.5
2
4
2
4
Heifers
2.5
2.5
2
5
2
5
Dairy Cows
4.5
4.5
2.5
6
2.5
6
Amount of bedding supplied to animals, kg DM per year
External
Rice straw
64,000
60,000
0
90,000
0
90,000
Percentage of crop products used as feed or bedding
Bean-Rice rotation
Rice straw (as feed)
0
0
0
100
0
100
Alfalfa-Rice rotation
Rice straw (as bedding)
0
0
0
0
0
100
Bean-Maize rotation
Bean straw (as bedding)
0
0
0
0
0
100
Milk proudction and use
Milk Production, kg per cow per day
24
24
24
30
24
30
Amount fed to animals, kg per year
3000
5000
1000
7500
–
–

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

3

rate (FL,p; kg/kg) and the apparent dry matter digestibility (DMD; kg/kg) 
of each feed, and the amount of dry matter from bedding material 
(DMBedding; kg) collected in the barn and mixed with produced faces and 
urine.

DMManure =
∑

p=1

DMAnimalFeed,p ×
(
1 −FL,p

)
× DMDp + DMBedding

The amounts of OM and C in manure are determined based on the ash 
content of the crop and animal products and assuming a C content in 
organic matter of 50 %. The total amounts of N, P and K in manure (in 
both urine and feces) are derived from the difference between intake and 
products of the animals, as demonstrated bellow for N only.

NManure =
∑

p=1

(
DMAnimalFeed,p × FN,p ×
(
1 −FL,p

) )
−NAnimalProducts

The amounts of produced manure DM, OM, C and nutrients esti­
mated by FarmDESIGN model serve as inputs of FarmM3 model. The 
FarmM3 model quantifies the degradation of OM and C, losses of N, P 
and K along the whole manure management chain using specific loss 
coefficients. The detailed calculation procedure of FarmM3 can be found 
in Qu et al. (2023). The amounts and characteristics of manure available 
for application are fed back from the FarmM3 module to FarmDESIGN 
model. Adding FarmM3 as an external manure module improves the 
flexibility of the FarmDESIGN model in estimating nutrient losses from 
manure management chains with different manure treatment 
technologies.

The farm evaluation results revealed that the original farm had a 
high livestock density of 6.5 LU/ha (LU refers to Livestock Unit equaling 
500 kg live weight), and a low feed self-reliance, with more than 70 % of 
feeds imported from outside the farm. Due to the large number of cows 
but a limited crop area, the farm exhibited a high farm N balance around 
272 kg/ha, with 77 % of N losses attributed to N volatilization from 
manure management. The N cycling rate, defined as the fraction of 
excreted manure N recycled into soil, was about 37 %, while over 30 % 
of manure N was exported off the farm.

2.3. Manure management scenarios

To investigate how different levels of technology and management 
practices can enhance manure management outcomes, reduce environ­
mental impacts, and improve nutrient use efficiency on farms, four 
manure management scenarios with different manure treatment tech­
nologies were developed and modelled in FarmM3 (Table 2). The 
manure management scenario M1 reflected the original farm practice, 
where manure was collected and stored without cover, resulting in 
significant nutrient losses through volatilization and runoff. The manure 
management scenario M2 introduced a concrete cover to the storage 
tank, which helped mitigate nutrient losses by reducing exposure to the 
elements, thereby enhancing overall nutrient retention. The manure 
management scenario M3 employed a more advanced approach by 
implementing solid-liquid separation, a technology that has been 
demonstrated to be both cost-effective and environmentally friendly 
(Aguirre-Villegas et al., 2019; Holly et al., 2017). In this scenario, the 
solid fraction was covered during storage, minimizing nutrient loss, 
while the liquid fraction was stored in a covered tank, further reducing 
potential nutrient emissions. The manure management scenario M4 
built on the advancements of M3 by incorporating best practices for land 
application. The solid manure was applied through incorporation, which 
significantly reduced nutrient runoff, while the liquid fraction was 
delivered using a trailing hose, optimizing nutrient uptake by crops and 
minimizing losses.

2.4. Farm scenarios and objective

To address the challenges of high nutrient losses and low farm 
nutrient use efficiency, two scenarios were developed. The first scenario

(Scenario A) aimed to optimize the number of livestock units based on 
the amount of feed produced within the farm. The objective of this 
scenario was to maximize whole farm N use efficiency (%) and soil 
organic matter (OM) balance (kg/ha), and to minimize N volatilization 
(kg/ha) and soil N losses (kg/ha). In Scenario B, the focus was on 
increasing nutrient circularity, improving feed self-sufficiency for the 
herd, and expanding food production by integrating more crop area. 
Since P surplus can also pose significant challenges for dairy operations, 
we included whole farm P balance as a critical objective. By optimizing 
both N and P balance, the scenario aimed to achieve a more holistic 
approach to farm nutrient management. It intended to maximize whole 
farm N use efficiency (%), self-supply of total feed DM (%), dietary en­
ergy production (persons fed/ha), and soil OM balance (kg/ha/year), 
while minimizing N volatilization (kg/ha) and whole farm P balance 
(kg/ha/year). The calculations for these objectives were as follows:

• Whole farm N use efficiency (%) is calculated by comparing the 
amount of N output to the amount of N input. Nitrogen can enter the 
farm through imported crop products, imported fertilizer or manure, 
symbiotic fixation, non-symbiotic fixation and deposition. The 
output of N includes exported N from crop product, animal product 
and exported animal manure.
• N volatilization (kg/ha) estimates the total cumulative N losses via 
ammonia emissions, nitrous oxide emissions and nitrogen (N2) 
emissions through the entire manure management process, including 
manure excretion, storage, treatment (such as solid-liquid separa­
tion, composting, anaerobic digestion etc.) and application.
• Soil N losses (kg/ha) quantifies the total N losses by denitrification, 
leaching and runoff from soil.
• Soil OM balance (kg/ha/year) is quantified as the difference between 
inputs of OM into the soil and losses by degradation, erosion, 
decomposition of active soil OM and added manure. Inputs of OM 
include crop roots and residues, mulch, and farm-produced and im­
ported manures.
• Whole farm P balance (kg/ha/year) is calculated as the difference 
between P inputs, which include imported feed, bedding materials, 
imported fertilizers, and atmospheric deposition, and P outputs, 
which consist of P in animal and crop products as well as exported 
manure.

Table 2 
Description of modelled manure management chains.

Manure management 
chains (MMCs)

Description

M1
All of the manure excreted in the barn was collected 
and stored in a tank without cover. After being stored 
for two months, the slurry was applied to fields without 
incorporation.
M2
All of the manure excreted in the barn was collected 
and stored in an underground tank with a concrete 
cover. After being stored for two months, the slurry was 
applied to fields without incorporation.
M3
All of the manure excreted in the barn was collected 
and stored in an underground tank before being 
separated into solid and liquid fractions. The separated 
solid fraction was stored and covered during storage. 
The liquid fraction was stored in an underground tank 
with a concrete cover. After being stored for two 
months, the liquid and solid fractions were applied to 
fields without incorporation.
M4
All of the manure excreted in the barn were collected 
and stored in an underground tank before being 
separated into solid and liquid fractions. The separated 
solid fraction was stored and covered during storage. 
The liquid fraction was stored in an underground tank 
with a concrete cover. After storage, the solid manure 
was applied to fields by broadcast application with 
incorporation and the liquid was applied to fields by a 
trailing hose.

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

4

• Self-supply of total feed DM (%) is a key indicator used to determine 
the proportion of feed produced on a farm. This calculation involves 
dividing the amount of feed produced on the farm by the total 
amount of feed consumed by the animals.
• Dietary energy production (persons fed/ha) is a crucial metric used 
to measure the efficiency and sustainability of food production sys­
tems. It quantifies the number of individuals that can meet their daily 
dietary needs based on the complete daily dietary reference intake 
from various sources such as field crops, animal breeding and other 
production systems.

For each farm scenario, we explored alternative farm configurations 
to meet the target objectives and investigated the impacts of MMCs with 
different manure treatment technologies on alternative farm 
configurations.

2.5. Decision variables and constraints

For each scenario, the decision variables included management 
variables of the size of the livestock herd, allocation of crop areas, the 
destination of crop products, and the amounts of external feeds and 
bedding materials supplied to animals (Table 1). Constraints (see 
Table 3) were set for the total crop areas that should not be more than 
9.5 ha in Scenario A and should be less than 45 ha in Scenario B. The 
extended farm areas in Scenario B were determined based on the 
availability of surrounding crop areas. The number of livestock units 
should be less than the baseline farm's 56.2 LU in Scenario A and be kept 
the same as for the baseline farm in Scenario B. The availability of en­
ergy, protein and fibrous material (‘structure’) in feed should match 
animal requirements, whereas intake capacity (corrected for saturation 
units) should not be exceeded. The soil N losses comprising leaching, 
runoff and denitrification should not be less than 20 kg N/ha/year, to 
make sure that enough N is in the system to support crop and grassland 
production while acknowledging unavoidable losses, and the soil P and 
K losses should not be less than 0 kg/ha/year to avoid mining. The 
supplied bedding material should be sufficient given requirements per 
animal (i.e., the bedding balance) with an allowed deviation of less than 
5 % for animal welfare (Table 3).

2.6. Model exploration

For model exploration, we ran the Pareto-based multi-objective 
optimization for 3000 iterations to get 500 alternative farm configura­
tions for each scenario. The complete mathematical explanation of the 
algorithm with the corresponding formulae is described by Groot et al. 
(2012). Here we briefly summarize the optimization process. The DE 
algorithm generates two populations of solutions which represent the 
decision variables. The opportunity space created by these populations 
is diverse; the variety in the decision variables (genotypes) creates di­
versity in farm performance that is measured by the indicators (phe­
notypes). The first population of ‘parents’ serves as the result-set that is 
iteratively improved, while the second population consists of ‘compet­
itors’ that are generated by uniform cross-over of three selected ‘parent’ 
solutions in each iteration.

The solutions in both populations are ranked using the principle of 
Pareto-optimality (Groot et al., 2012) and the Euclidean distance be­
tween the solutions in the opportunity space is calculated from the 
normalized indicator values, which serves to quantify a crowding 
metric. After ranking a selection process is conducted by pairwise 
comparison: a solution in the ‘parent’ population is replaced by the 
paired individual from the ‘competitor’ population if the latter has a 
better Pareto rank or if the ranks are equal it is positioned in a less 
crowded part of the opportunity space. The rank-based selection results 
in movement of the ‘parent’ population in the direction of the trade-off 
frontier (or surface), while the crowd-based selection ensures spread 
along the frontier (or surface).

The final set of alternative farm configurations produced by the 
model represents a solution space (Groot and Rossing, 2011). The so­
lution frontier, defined as the boundary of solution space, illustrates the 
best possible trade-offs among the objectives, highlighting the optimal 
configurations that balance competing goals. We repeated each opti­
mization for 3 times to get stable outcomes. The parameter settings of 
uniform cross-over in the Differential Evolution algorithm of the opti­
mization was 0.85 for mutation probability and 0.15 for amplitude of 
mutations (Groot et al., 2007).

3. Results

3.1. Impacts of manure management on N losses from manure 
management chains (MMCs)

As shown in Fig. 1, although there were no obvious differences in N 
losses and N use efficiencies between MMCs M1 and M2, MMC config­
urations M3 and M4 could reduce N losses by 46 to 58 % and increase

Table 3 
Overview of constraints on different farm scenarios of the case study farm.

Scenario A
Scenario B

Description
Baseline
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum

Deviation in 
feed balance 
intake (%)

−6.9
-∞
0
-∞
0

Deviation in 
feed balance 
energy (%)

2.2
−5
5
−5
5

Deviation in 
feed balance 
protein (%)

5.2
0
30
0
30

Deviation in 
feed balance 
structure (%)

159.1
0
∞
0
∞

Rotation Area 
(ha)
9.5
9
9.5
9
45

Livestock Units 
(LU)
56.2
15
57
–
–

Deviation 
bedding balance 
(%)

1.3
−5
5
−5
5

Soil nitrogen (N) 
losses (kg/ha)
197
20
197–352 
a
20
197–352 
a

Phosphorus (P) 
balance (kg/ha)
37
0
∞
0
∞

Potassium (K) 
balance (kg/ha)
664
0
∞
0
∞

a The soil N losses varied with manure management chains.

Fig. 1. Nitrogen losses and N use efficiency under different manure manage­
ment chains (M1-M4, described in Table 2). The blue bars represent N losses, 
and the diamond dots indicate N use efficiency of various manure management 
chains. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

5

manure N use efficiencies by more than 30 %, compared to M1. This 
implied that applying a single emission mitigation measure (i.e., slurry 
cover) had limited influence on N losses from MMCs and manure N use 
efficiencies, while combinations of slurry solid-liquid separation, 
covered solid and liquid fractions storage and improved manure appli­
cation could remarkably reduce N losses and improve N use efficiencies 
of manure management.

3.2. Impacts of manure management on N losses from the whole farm

Differences among the MMC configurations M1-M4 combined with 
the baseline farm configuration would not result in reduction of total N 
losses from the whole farm or improvement of farm N use efficiency. Due 
to the high livestock density and heavy reliance on imported feeds in 
baseline farm configuration, the N excreted by animals exceeded the N 
requirements of crop production, resulting in a high N surplus. Without 
changing the number of cows and crop areas, the conserved N from 
improved manure management would be lost after being applied to soil. 
Therefore, for this intensive mixed crop-dairy farm, improvements in

manure management did not affect farm N use efficiency which is 
calculated as the ratio of N output (i.e., crop and animal products) from 
the farm to total N inputs (i.e., imported feeds, fixation and deposition) 
to the farm.

3.3. Effects of manure management on farm environmental performance

The results of multi-objective optimization in farm Scenario A 
revealed distinct synergies (1) between improving whole farm N use 
efficiency and reducing N volatilization (Fig. 2A), (2) between 
improving whole farm N use efficiency and decreasing soil N losses 
(Fig. 2B), (3) between reductions of soil N losses and N volatilization 
(Fig. 2C). On the other hand, trade-offs were found (4) between im­
provements of whole farm N use efficiency and soil OM balance 
(Fig. 2D), (5) between reducing N volatilization and increasing the soil 
OM balance (Fig. 2E), and (6) between reducing soil N losses and 
improving the soil OM balance (Fig. 2F). The main factor explaining the 
synergies and trade-offs between objectives was the number of cows on 
the farm. With the same farm area, a greater whole farm N use efficiency

Fig. 2. Relationships between the objectives whole farm N use efficiency, N volatilization, soil N loss and soil OM balance in the farm scenario A with different 
manure management chains (i.e., M1, M2, M3 and M4). The larger symbols mark the performance of the baseline farm configuration.

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

6

could be achieved by reducing the number of cows. Reducing the 
number of cows reduced N volatilization and soil N losses but also 
lowered the soil OM balance.

Although the trade-off or synergy relationships among objectives 
were present under different MMCs, considerable differences in posi­
tions and slopes of solution frontiers in terms of N volatilization, soil N 
losses and soil OM balance among MMCs were observed (Fig. 2). These 
differences could primarily be explained by the impacts of manure 
management technologies on N volatilization, soil N losses and soil OM 
balance. As shown in Fig. 2, the apparent distance between the solution 
frontiers of MMCs M1, M2 and M3, M4 in terms of N volatilization and 
whole farm N use efficiency (Fig. 2A) showed lower N volatilization in 
MMCs M3 and M4 due to multiple N mitigation measures (i.e., solid- 
liquid separation, cover and improved application methods). Similar 
results were also found in solution frontiers of N volatilization and soil N 
losses (Fig. 2C) and N volatilization and soil OM balance (Fig. 2E). But 
higher soil N losses and soil OM balance were observed in MMCs M3 and 
M4 than in MMCs M1 and M2 with the same whole farm N use efficiency 
(Fig. 2B and D). Higher soil N losses in MMCs M3 and M4 demonstrated 
the compensatory N losses from manure management and soil, with less 
N volatilization from MMCs M3 and M4 (Fig. 2A) leading to higher N

losses from soil (Fig. 2B). Higher soil OM balance in MMCs M3 and M4 
could be as a result of the larger contribution of solid manure to soil OM 
than the contribution of slurry manure in MMCs M1 and M2.

The steeper slope of the synergy frontier between N volatilization 
and whole farm N use efficiency in MMCs M1 and M2 than in MMCs M3 
and M4 indicated a stronger reduction in N volatilization in MMCs M1 
and M2 needed to reach the same increase in whole farm N use effi­
ciency (Fig. 2A). On the contrary, the steeper slope of the synergy 
frontiers between N volatilization and soil N losses in MMCs M3 and M4 
showed that with the same decrease in N volatilization, more reduction 
in soil N losses could be obtained in MMCs M3 and M4 than M1 and M2 
(Fig. 2C). Similar slopes but larger ranges of the frontiers were observed 
between whole farm N use efficiency and soil N losses, between whole 
farm N use efficiency and soil OM balance, and between soil N losses and 
soil OM balance in MMCs M3 and M4 than M1 and M2 (Fig. 2B and C). 
Compared to the baseline farm N use efficiency, a larger improvement in 
whole farm N use efficiency could be achieved in MMCs M3 and M4 than 
in MMCs M1 and M2.

Fig. 3. Relationships between the objectives whole farm N use efficiency, self-supply of feed DM, dietary energy supply, N volatilization, whole farm P balance and 
soil OM balance in the farm scenario B with two different manure management chains. The larger symbols mark the performance of the baseline farm configuration.

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

7

3.4. Effects of manure management on optimization results for more 
integrated crop-dairy production

Since there was no clear difference in optimization results of objec­
tives between MMCs M1 and M2, and between MMCs M3 and M4, we 
only performed farm explorations for the two most contrasting MMCs 
(M1 and M4) in farm Scenario B. Compared to exploration results of 
farm Scenario A, similar but more curvilinear trade-offs and synergies 
among objectives of whole farm N use efficiency, N volatilization and 
soil OM balance were observed in farm Scenario B due to more 
complicated interactions with added objectives of feed self-sufficiency, 
dietary energy supply and whole farm P balance. Exploration results 
of integration of crop and dairy production with multi-objective opti­
mization indicated that changing farm configurations could also sub­
stantially improve whole farm N use efficiency, reduce N volatilization 
and improve soil OM balance (Fig. 3). With MMC M1, a maximum whole 
farm N use efficiency of 65 % could be reached, while MMC M4 could 
obtain values up to 85 %.

An obvious synergy relationship between reducing N volatilization 
and reducing P balance was observed (Fig. 3J). The steeper slope of the 
synergy frontier between N volatilization and whole farm P balance in 
MMC M4 compared to MMC M1 indicated that MMC M4 can achieve a 
greater reduction in P balance with the same decrease in N volatilization 
(Fig. 3J). Improved manure management MMC M4 also contributed to 
larger solution spaces for relationships between improving whole farm N 
use efficiency and reducing whole farm P balance (Fig. 3G), between 
increasing self-supply of feed DM and reducing whole farm P balance 
(Fig. 3H), and between improving dietary energy supply and reducing 
whole farm P balance (Fig. 3I). Improved manure management moves 
the synergy frontiers between reducing whole farm P balance and 
improving self-supply of feed DM (Fig. 3H), and between reducing 
whole farm P balance and improving soil OM balance in a more desir­
able direction (Fig. 3O).

The improved MMC M4 also moved the trade-off frontiers between 
whole farm N use efficiency and self-supply rate of feed DM (Fig. 3A) 
and between whole farm N use efficiency and dietary energy supply

Fig. 4. Modelled allocation of crop areas and quantities of imported feeds in each alternative farm configuration generated to meet the objectives of maximizing self- 
supply rate of feed DM and dietary energy yield in farm Scenario B. The x-axis values were ordered from minimum to maximum for each objective.

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

8

(Fig. 3B) towards more desirable directions. But a clear trade-off be­
tween increasing self-supply rate of feed DM and improving dietary 
energy supply was observed (Fig. 3C), indicating food-feed competition 
at the case study farm. Fig. 4 shows how the shift in cropping patterns 
and changes in the amount of external feed inputs define the relation­
ship between feed self-supply and dietary energy production. In farm 
Scenario B, to approach the objective of increasing feed self-sufficiency, 
the model shifted the feed production from external importation to on- 
farm production, subsequently causing the increase of areas to feed 
crops, such as alfalfa (Fig. 4A and B). Conversely, in the alternative 
configurations with greater dietary energy supply, the model allocated 
larger areas to food crops (i.e., Chinese cabbage and maize) and smaller 
areas to alfalfa. The reduced on-farm alfalfa silage production was 
compensated by an increased external alfalfa silage input (Fig. 4C and 
D).

4. Discussion

In this study we compared N losses under various manure manage­
ment chains with different manure management technologies, and 
explored the effects of improved manure management chains on farm 
environmental performance optimization. The results demonstrated that 
an individual emission mitigation measure was insufficient to reduce N 
losses at manure management chain level. However, implementing a 
combination of solid-liquid separation, covered solid or liquid manure 
storage and improved manure application (M4) resulted in substantial 
reductions in N losses from the whole manure management chains.

The importance of an integrated approach with combined manure 
management technologies along the manure management chain has 
been pointed out (De Vries et al., 2015a, 2015b), given the compensa­
tory losses among manure management facilities. Previous study re­
ported that the reduced N loss by covered solid manure storage resulted 
in larger N loss after manure field application, and highlighted that 
combined manure management practices were more effective to reduce 
total N losses (Shah et al., 2013). In a study by Rotz et al. (2006) for a 
farm with 100 cows on 100 ha cropland and a farm with 1000 cows on 
600 ha cropland, implementing nutrient conservation technologies, 
including a barn floor for feces and urine separation, covered six-month 
manure storage, and manure injection, reduced ammonia emission by 
54 % to 77 % and reduced total farm N losses by 24 % to 29 %.

Although multiple mitigation measures showed potential for 
reducing N loss from manure management, we found no decrease in 
total N loss from the farm. This could be explained by the high livestock 
density and large quantity of imported feed N on the case study farm. 
The imported feed N led to excessive amounts of N cycled through the 
farm system. Although improved manure management practices 
conserved more N in manure, the limited croplands could not assimilate 
the conserved N, leading to larger losses from soil. This implied that for 
intensive dairy farms with limited land availability, it probably is not 
enough to reduce N losses only by improving manure management chain 
with multiple mitigation practices, and exporting manure outside the 
farm or integrating more croplands to the farm is likely needed.

We also found no substantial decrease in whole farm P balance from 
improved manure management practices. This was primarily because 
manure P was mainly lost by runoff and leaching after application. As 
noted by Spears et al. (2003), around 96 % of manure P can be conserved 
during manure storage and accumulated in the soil after manure 
application. Additionally, feed imports significantly contribute to the 
whole farm P balance (Ros et al., 2023). By enhancing feed self-reliance 
through the integration of more crop areas for on-farm feed production, 
we could see substantial reductions in whole farm P balance. This is in 
consistent with the finding from Harrison et al. (2021), which indicate 
that farming systems with a higher inclusion rate of home-grown feed in 
their herds' diet exhibited greater P use efficiency and lower P surplus.

The results of the multi-objective optimization on environmental 
performance in the case study farm demonstrated that improved manure

management with multiple mitigation measures could move trade-off 
and synergy relationships among N volatilization, soil N losses, soil 
OM balance and whole farm N use efficiency in desirable directions. 
Integrated crop-dairy systems offered further possibilities for mini­
mizing environmental impacts. Larger reductions in N volatilization and 
greater whole farm N use efficiencies were achieved through integrating 
crop and dairy production.

Integrated crop–livestock systems have been identified as a viable 
strategy to increase nutrient circularity and limit the negative environ­
mental impacts (Lemaire et al., 2014; Moraine et al., 2014; Peyraud 
et al., 2014).For intensive dairy farming systems with heavy reliance on 
off-farm feeds and with substantial manure nutrient surpluses, closing 
the loop in nutrient and energy cycles by recoupling crop systems at 
farm and regional scales can help reduce the environmental externalities 
of intensive farms and increase their resilience (Garrett et al., 2020; 
Chen et al., 2023). This study showed that combined with improved 
manure management, crop-dairy integration reduced N volatilization, 
soil N losses, whole farm P balance and achieved high farm nutrient use 
efficiency.

Although the obvious trade-off between feed self-sufficiency and 
dietary energy supply at the case study farm was identified, it is 
important to note that this is not the case for other integrated crop- 
livestock systems. With a high stocking density, this case study farm 
allocated the majority of crop area to produce feeds, creating a trade-off 
between food and feed production. Integrating crop areas to produce 
feed created a shift on the trade-off, but did not change the trade-off 
relationship. The issue of crop-dairy integration has raised the ques­
tion about resource allocation for food and feed production, especially 
for intensive dairy farms with high stocking densities (Muscat et al., 
2020; Puech and Stark, 2023). The food-feed competition in our study 
was mainly generated from the use of cropland, with more cropland 
used to produce livestock feeds (e.g., alfalfa and whole maize silage) 
leading to a smaller area for food production. Potential ways to alleviate 
the food-feed competition on integrated crop-dairy farm might include 
increasing nutrient use efficiency in cropping systems through opti­
mizing crop rotations and increasing crop yields per area (Barbieri et al., 
2021). Increasing animal feed use efficiency at the animal and herd level 
is also an important lever to save feed resources (Barbieri et al., 2022). 
Additionally, collaboration between local crop and dairy farms for direct 
exchange of manure and crop by-products could further close nutrient 
loops at larger scales, promoting resource utilization efficiency and 
contributing to a circular food system (Martin et al., 2016; De Boer and 
Van Ittersum, 2018; Ghimire et al., 2021).

Some limitations of this study were identified based on current re­
sults. First, we explored alternative farm configurations with a focus on 
optimizing environmental and nutritional indicators and without 
considering economic indicators. Although some studies have proven 
that crop-livestock integration could limit the negative environmental 
impacts without compromising farm economics (Martin et al., 2016), in 
practice, the cost for manure management varies with types of treatment 
technologies (Hansen, 2019; Sefeedpari et al., 2019). A more compre­
hensive evaluation that considers environmental, economic and nutri­
tional indicators would contribute to a better understanding of the role 
of manure management in farm management, and would help farmers to 
adopt cost-effective manure management technologies. Second, our 
study might underestimate the contribution of manure management on 
farm nutrient management as the model calculated nutrient flows based 
on mass balance without considering the nutrient availability of 
different manure types as fertilizer which highly depends on methods of 
manure handling, storage and treatment (Rufino et al., 2007; Risbery 
et al., 2017). In addition, the impacts of manure management technol­
ogies on manure quality are crucial for maintaining soil biodiversity, 
and are worthwhile to investigate (K¨oninger et al., 2021).

The combined FarmDESIGN and FarmM3 models offer a useful tool 
to explore how improved manure management influence nutrient flows 
and use efficiency at the whole farm. The generated alternative solutions

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

9

based on Pareto-based multi-objective optimization algorithm can sup­
port farmers to have their autonomous choice from a broad portfolio of 
alternatives and can serve as entry points for future participatory pro­
cess with multiple stakeholders (Groot and Rossing, 2011). As integra­
tion of crop and dairy production within farms requires greater 
workload and increased skills and knowledge in animal, manure, soil 
and crop management, future research on integrating crop and dairy 
production beyond the farm scale by exchanging manure and feedstuff 
between dairy and crop farms are necessary, especially for intensive and 
specialized farms. Nutrient “sharing” between crop and dairy farms 
within a region can provide complementary interactions and benefits, 
reducing externalities of specialized farms and contributing to close 
nutrient cycles at a larger scale.

5. Conclusions

Manure management plays an important role in farm nutrient 
management of intensive mixed crop-dairy farms. Due to substantial 
nutrient losses from a large amount of produced manure, as well as 
complicated interactions of manure management and soil and crops, the 
effects of improved manure management on farm nutrient management 
should also be considered when seeking to optimize farm configurations. 
Our study integrated an external manure management model (FarmM3) 
to a whole farm model (FarmDESIGN), which enables (i) to evaluate the 
effects of diverse improved manure management technologies on 
nutrient losses from manure management and from the whole farm 
system; (ii) to identify potential influence of improved manure man­
agement on multi-objective optimization of farm configurations.

To reduce nutrient losses from the whole manure management chain, 
a single manure management technology was insufficient, highlighting 
the importance of integrated approaches to reduce N losses from manure 
management. At a high livestock density, total N losses from the whole 
farm were not influenced by improved manure management, since 
conserved N from manure management could be lost after being applied 
to cropland. A greater reduction of N losses from both manure man­
agement and soil could be achieved by reducing livestock density, 
resulting in an improved whole N use efficiency. Additionally, improved 
manure management did not lead to a decrease in whole farm P balance, 
primarily because manure P was mainly lost through runoff and leach­
ing after application. However, integrating crop and dairy production to 
increase on-farm feed production could significantly reduce whole farm 
P balance.

Although trade-offs and synergies existed among objectives, 
improved manure management did not change relationships among 
objectives but did affect the positions and the slopes of the solution 
frontiers between objectives of N volatilization, soil N losses and soil OM 
balance. To move towards sustainable intensification of dairy produc­
tion, increasing nutrient circularity by improving manure management 
with multiple mitigation measures and integrating crop and dairy pro­
duction within farm or between farms are necessary. Given the trade-off 
of food-feed competition when integrating crop production within dairy 
farms with high stocking densities and heavy reliance on external feeds, 
food production should also be considered when optimizing farm con­
figurations towards more sustainable agricultural production.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Qingbo Qu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cura­
tion, Conceptualization. Jeroen C.J. Groot: Writing – review & editing, 
Supervision, Software, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptual­
ization. Keqiang Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Re­
sources, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Research on Key Technologies for 
Reducing Emissions and Enhancing Resource Utilization of Manure in 
Large-scale Dairy Farms (grant number 202402AE090032), Science & 
Technology Innovation Program of Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Science, the Cooperative Sino-Dutch PhD Programme between Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Science and Wageningen University & 
Research (grant number MOE11NL1A20151701N), and the China 
Scholarship Council (grant number 202003250092).

References

Aguirre-Villegas, H.A., Larson, R.A., Sharara, M.A., 2019. Anaerobic digestion, solid- 
liquid separation, and drying of dairy manure: measuring constituents and modeling 
emission. Sci. Total Environ. 696, 134059. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2019.134059.
Bai, Z.H., Ma, L., Oenema, O., Chen, Q., Zhang, F.S., 2013. Nitrogen and phosphorus use 
efficiencies in dairy production in China. J. Environ. Qual. 42, 990–1001. https:// 
doi.org/10.2134/jeq2012.0464.
Barbieri, P., Pellerin, S., Seufert, V., Smith, L., Ramankutty, N., Nesme, T., 2021. Global 
option space for organic agriculture is delimited by nitrogen availability. Nat. Food 
2, 363–372. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021-00276-y.
Barbieri, P., Dumont, B., Benoit, M., Nesme, T., 2022. Opinion paper: livestock is at the 
heart of interacting levers to reduce feed-food competition in agroecological food 
systems. Animal 16, 100436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.animal.2021.100436.
Berg, W., Brunsch, R., Pazsiczki, I., 2006. Greenhouse gas emissions from covered slurry 
compared with uncovered during storage. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 112, 129–134. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2005.08.031.
Chadwick, D.R., Williams, J.R., Lu, Y.L., Ma, L., Bai, Z.H., Hou, Y., Chen, X.P., 
Misselbrook, T.H., 2020. Strategies to reduce nutrient pollution from manure 
management in China. Front. Agric. Sci. Eng. 7, 45–55. https://doi.org/10.15302/j- 
fase-2019293.
Chen, X., Lin, J., Tan, K., Pei, Y., Wang, X., 2023. Cooperation between specialized 
cropping and livestock farms at local level reduces carbon footprint of agricultural 
system: a case study of recoupling maize-cow system in South China. Agric. Ecosyst. 
Environ. 348, 108406. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2023.108406.
Clay, N., Garnett, T., Lorimer, J., 2020. Dairy intensification: drivers, impacts and 
alternatives. Ambio 49, 35–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-019-01177-y.
De Boer, I.J.M., Van Ittersum, M.K., 2018. Circularity in Agricultural Production. 
Wageningen University. https://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/fullte 
xt/470625 (accessed 23 July 2021). 
De Vries, J.W., Groenestein, C.M., Schr¨oder, J.J., Hoogmoed, W.B., Sukkel, W., Groot 
Koerkamp, P.W.G., De Boer, I.J.M., 2015a. Integrated manure management to 
reduce environmental impact: II. Environmental impact assessment of strategies. 
Agr. Syst. 138, 88–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2015.05.006.
De Vries, J.W., Hoogmoed, W.B., Groenestein, C.M., Schr¨oder, J.J., Sukkel, W., De 
Boer, I.J.M., Groot Koerkamp, P.W.G., 2015b. Integrated manure management to 
reduce environmental impact: I. Structured design of strategies. Agric. Syst. 139, 
29–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2015.05.010.
FAO, 2018. The State of the world’s Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture - 
Livestock Diversity Is Essential, 2nd ed. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations.
Foged, H.L., Flotats, X., Blasi, A.B., Palatsi, J., Magri, A., Schelde, K.M., 2011. Inventory 
of manure processing activities in Europe. Technical Report No. I concerning 
“Manure Processing Activities in Europe” to the European Commission, Directorate- 
General Environment, 138.
Garrett, R.D., Ryschawy, J., Bell, L.W., Cortner, O., Ferreira, J., Garik, A.V.N., Gil, J.D.B., 
Klerkx, L., Moraine, M., Peterson, C.A., dos Reis, J.C., Valentim, J.F., 2020. Drivers 
of decoupling and recoupling of crop and livestock systems at farm and territorial 
scales. Ecol. Soc. 25 (1), 24. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11412-250124.
Ghimire, S., Wang, J., Fleck, J.R., 2021. Integrated crop-livestock systems for nitrogen 
management: a multi-scale spatial analysis. Animals 11 (1), 100. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ani11010100.
Groot, J.C.J., Rossing, W.A.H., 2011. Model-aided learning for adaptive management of 
natural resources: an evolutionary design perspective. Methods Ecol. Evol. 2, 
643–650. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00114.x.
Groot, J.C.J., Rossing, W.A.H., Jellema, A., Stobbelaar, D.J., Renting, H., Van 
Ittersum, M.K., 2007. Exploring multi-scale trade-offs between nature conservation,

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

10

agricultural profits and landscape quality—a methodology to support discussions on 
land-use perspectives. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 120, 58–69. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agee.2006.03.037.
Groot, J.C.J., Oomen, G.J.M., Rossing, W.A.H., 2012. Multi-objective optimization and 
design of farming systems. Agr. Syst. 110, 63–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2012.03.012.
Hansen, B.G., 2019. CO2–emission, costs and capacity of different manure management 
practices-results from an advisory project. Agr. Syst. 173, 325–334. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2019.03.011.
Harrison, B.P., Dorigo, M., Reynolds, C.K., Sinclair, L.A., Dijkstra, J., Ray, P.P., 2021. 
Determinants of phosphorus balance and use efficiency in diverse dairy farming 
systems. Agr. Syst. 194, 103273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103273.
Holly, M.A., Larson, R.A., Powell, J.M., Ruark, M.D., Aguirre-Villegas, H., 2017. 
Greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions from digested and separated dairy manure 
during storage and after land application. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 239, 410–419. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2017.02.007.
Hou, Y., Velthof, G.L., Oenema, O., 2015. Mitigation of ammonia, nitrous oxide and 
methane emissions from manure management chains: a meta-analysis and integrated 
assessment. Glob. Change Biol. 21 (3), 1293–1312. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
gcb.12767.
K¨oninger, J., Lugato, E., Panagos, P., Kochupillai, M., Orgiazzi, A., Briones, M.J.I., 2021. 
Manure management and soil biodiversity: towards more sustainable food systems in 
the EU. Agr. Syst. 194, 103251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103251.
Lemaire, G., Franzluebbers, A., Carvalho, P.C.D.F., Dedieu, B., 2014. Integrated 
crop–livestock systems: strategies to achieve synergy between agricultural 
production and environmental quality. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 190, 4–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2013.08.009.
Martin, G., Moraine, M., Ryschawy, J., Magne, M.-A., Asai, M., Sarthou, J.-P., Duru, M., 
Therond, O., 2016. Crop–livestock integration beyond the farm level: a review. 
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 36, 53. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-016-0390-x.
Marton, S.M.R.R., Zimmermann, A., Kreuzer, M., Gaillard, G., 2016. Comparing the 
environmental performance of mixed and specialised dairy farms: the role of the 
system level analysed. J. Clean. Prod. 124, 73–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2016.02.074.
Moraine, M., Duru, M., Nicholas, P., Leterme, P., Therond, O., 2014. Farming system 
design for innovative crop-livestock integration in Europe. Animal 8, 1204–1217. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1751731114001189.
Muscat, A., de Olde, E.M., de Boer, I.J.M., Ripoll-Bosch, R., 2020. The battle for biomass: 
a systematic review of food-feed-fuel competition. Glob. Food Sec. 25, 100330. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.100330.
Oenema, O., Tamminga, S., 2005. Nitrogen in global animal production and 
management options for improving nitrogen use efficiency. Sci. China. Ser. C. 48, 
871–887. https://doi.org/10.1360/062005-279.
Oenema, O., Oudendag, D., Velthof, G.L., 2007. Nutrient losses from manure 
management in the European Union. Livest. Sci. 112, 261–272. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.livsci.2007.09.007.

Peyraud, J.-L., Taboada, M., Delaby, L., 2014. Integrated crop and livestock systems in 
Western Europe and South America: a review. Eur. J. Agron. 57, 31–42. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.eja.2014.02.005.
Puech, T., Stark, F., 2023. Diversification of an integrated crop-livestock system: 
Agroecological and food production assessment at farm scale. Agric. Ecosyst. 
Environ. 344, 108300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2022.108300.
Qu, Q., Zhang, K., Groot, J.C., 2023. A model to identify entry points to curb emissions 
from complex manure management chains. J. Clean. Prod. 137787. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137787.
Ros, M.B.H., Godber, O.F., Olivo, A.J., Reed, K.F., Ketterings, Q.M., 2023. Key nitrogen 
and phosphorus performance indicators derived from farm-gate mass balances on 
dairies. J. Dairy Sci. 106 (5), 3268–3286. https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.2022-22297.
Rotz, C.A., Oenema, J., van Keulen, H., 2006. Whole farm management to reduce 
nutrient losses from dairy farms: a simulation study. Appl. Eng. Agric. 22, 773–784.
Rufino, M.C., Tittonell, P., van Wijk, M.T., Castellanos-Navarrete, A., Delve, R.J., de 
Ridder, N., Giller, K.E., 2007. Manure as a key resource within smallholder farming 
systems: Analysing farm-scale nutrient cycling efficiencies with the NUANCES 
framework. Livest. Sci. 112, 273–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.livsci.2007.09.011.
Ryschawy, J., Choisis, N., Choisis, J.P., Joannon, A., Gibon, A., 2012. Mixed crop- 
livestock systems: an economic and environmental-friendly way of farming? Animal 
6, 1722–1730. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1751731112000675.
Sajeev, E.P.M., Winiwarter, W., Amon, B., 2018. Greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions 
from different stages of liquid manure management chains: abatement options and 
emission interactions. J. Environ. Qual. 47, 30–41. https://doi.org/10.2134/ 
jeq2017.05.0199.
Schut, A.G.T., Cooledge, E.C., Moraine, M., Van de Ven, G.W.J., Jones, D.L., 
Chadwick, D.R., 2021. Reintegration of crop-livestock systems in Europe: an 
overview. Front. Agric. Sci. Eng. 8, 111–129. https://doi.org/10.15302/JFASE- 
2020373.
Sefeedpari, P., Vellinga, T., Rafiee, S., Sharifi, M., Shine, P., Pishgar-Komleh, S.H., 2019. 
Technical, environmental and cost-benefit assessment of manure management chain: 
a case study of large scale dairy farming. J. Clean. Prod. 233, 857–868. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.06.146.
Shah, G.A., Groot, J.C., Shah, G.M., Lantinga, E.A., 2013. Simulation of long-term carbon 
and nitrogen dynamics in grassland-based dairy farming systems to evaluate 
mitigation strategies for nutrient losses. PloS One 8, e67279. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0067279.
Sommer, S.G., Hutchings, N.J., 2001. Ammonia emission from field applied manure and 
its reduction - invited paper. Eur. J. Agron. 15, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S1161-0301(01)00112-5.
Sommer, S.G., Christensen, M.L., Schmidt, T., Jensen, L.S., 2013. Animal Manure 
Recycling Treatment and Management. John Wiley & Sons.
Spears, R.A., Young, A.J., Kohn, R.A., 2003. Whole-farm phosphorus balance on western 
dairy farms. J. Dairy Sci. 86 (2), 688–695.
Zou, T., Meng, F., Zhou, J., Ying, H., Liu, X., Hou, Y., Zhao, Z., Zhang, F., Xu, W., 2023. 
Quantifying nitrogen and phosphorus losses from crop and livestock production and 
mitigation potentials in Erhai Lake Basin, China. Agric. Syst. 211, 103745. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2023.103745.

Q. Qu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Agricultural Systems 222 (2025) 104170

11