Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

Available online 28 January 2021
0308-521X/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Digital twins in smart farming

Cor Verdouw a,b,*, Bedir Tekinerdogan a, Adrie Beulens a, Sjaak Wolfert a,c

a Information Technology Group, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 35, 6700, AA, Wageningen, the Netherlands 
b Mprise, P.O. Box 598, 3900, AN, Veenendaal, the Netherlands 
c Wageningen Economic Research, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 35, 6700, AA, Wageningen, the Netherlands

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: 
Smart agriculture 
Internet of things 
Farm management systems 
Remote sensing and control 
Virtualization

A B S T R A C T

Digital Twins are very promising to bring smart farming to new levels of farming productivity and sustainability. 
A Digital Twin is a digital equivalent of a real-life object of which it mirrors its behaviour and states over its 
lifetime in a virtual space. Using Digital Twins as a central means for farm management enables the decoupling of 
physical flows from its planning and control. As a consequence, farmers can manage operations remotely based 
on (near) real-time digital information instead of having to rely on direct observation and manual tasks on-site. 
This allows them to act immediately in case of (expected) deviations and to simulate effects of interventions 
based on real-life data. This paper analyses how Digital Twins can advance smart farming. It defines the concept, 
develops a typology of different types of Digital Twins, and proposes a conceptual framework for designing and 
implementing Digital Twins. The framework comprises a control model based on a general systems approach and 
an implementation model for Digital Twin systems based on the Internet of Things—Architecture (IoT-A), a 
reference architecture for IoT systems. The framework is applied to and validated in five smart farming use cases 
of the European IoF2020 project, focussing on arable farming, dairy farming, greenhouse horticulture, organic 
vegetable farming and livestock farming.

1. Introduction

Modern agricultural production is not possible without reliable and 
up-to-date information about farm operations. Farms increasingly have 
to rely on digital technologies such as sensing and monitoring devices, 
advanced analytics, and smart equipment. Agricultural production is 
changing fast towards smart farming systems, driven by the rapid pace 
of technology development like cloud computing, the Internet of Things, 
big data, machine learning, augmented reality and robotics (Janssen 
et al., 2017; Tzounis et al., 2017; Wolfert et al., 2017; Kamilaris and 
Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018; Zhai et al., 2020). Smart Farming can be seen as 
the next phase of Precision Agriculture, in which management tasks not 
only are based on precise location data but also on context data, situa­
tional awareness and event triggers (Balafoutis et al., 2017; Wolfert 
et al., 2017). A smart farming system can be viewed as a cyber-physical 
control cycle that seamlessly integrates sensing and monitoring, smart 
analyses & planning and smart control of farm operations for all relevant 
farm processes (‘whole farm management perspective’). 
In smart farming systems, farmers can monitor and control opera­
tions remotely, based on (near) real-time digital information instead of

direct observation and manual tasks on-site. Consequently, farmers are 
automatically informed if there is a problem, or anything is expected to 
go wrong. Behind their desk or smartphone, they can check the situation 
in the field or stable by viewing a rich digital image of the plant, animal 
or machine concerned. At the same time, machine learning algorithms 
augment the digital view with object-specific analyses and advices. 
Farmers can simulate corrective and preventive actions and evaluate its 
impact on the digital representation. Finally, the chosen intervention 
can be executed remotely and the farmer can use the digital view again 
to verify if the (expected) problem is solved. It can also be expected that 
this smart farm management cycle increasingly becomes autonomous, 
without manual intervention of the farmer anymore. In conclusion, you 
could say that every object in the farm (e.g. crop, field, cow, equipment) 
is being virtualized and can be more and more remotely controlled. A 
Digital Twin is an appealing metaphor to characterize this development. 
Although there are several definitions of a Digital Twin - as will be 
dealt with later on –a Digital Twin basically is a digital equivalent of a 
real-life object of which it mirrors its behaviour and its states over its 
lifetime in a virtual space (Boschert and Rosen, 2016; Grieves and 
Vickers, 2017). Using Digital Twins as a central means for farm

* Corresponding author at: Information Technology Group, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 35, 6700, AA, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 
E-mail address: cor.verdouw@wur.nl (C. Verdouw).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Agricultural Systems

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2020.103046 
Received 8 May 2020; Received in revised form 19 December 2020; Accepted 23 December 2020

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

2

management allows for the decoupling of physical flows from its plan­
ning and control. A Digital Twin removes fundamental constraints 
concerning place, time, and human observation (Verdouw et al., 2015; 
Verdouw et al., 2016b). Farming would no longer require physical 
proximity, which enables remote and automated execution, monitoring, 
control, and coordination of farm operations. This allows for the 
decoupling of physical flows from information aspects of farm processes. 
Digital Twins can also be enriched with information that cannot be 
observed (or not accurately) by the human senses (e.g. sensor and sat­
ellite data) or data that are provided by other information owners. 
Moreover, a crucial aspect of a Digital Twin is that it can add intelligence 
using advanced analytics. As such, Digital Twins do not only represent 
actual states, but can also analyze historical states and simulate future 
behaviour. As a consequence, applications based on Digital Twins, if 
properly synchronized, enable farmers and other stakeholders to act 
immediately in case of (expected) deviations. 
Digital Twins are very promising to bring smart farming to new 
levels of farming productivity and sustainability. Although Digital Twins 
have recently received a lot of interest, a sound basis for development 
and implementation is still in progress (Schleich et al., 2017; Jones et al., 
2020). Especially the application to the domain of smart farming is in its 
infancy (Monteiro et al., 2018; Sreedevi and Santosh Kumar, 2020). 
There are some explorative studies and cases about Digital Twins in farm 
management (such as Verdouw and Kruize, 2017; Jo et al., 2018; 
Monteiro et al., 2018; Kampker et al., 2019; Linz et al., 2019; Sreedevi 
and Santosh Kumar, 2020; Skobelev et al., 2020), but especially the 
management aspects of using Digital Twins to plan, monitor, control and 
optimize farm processes need to be further studied. 
This paper aims to contribute to resolve this gap by analysing how 
Digital Twins can advance smart farming. More specifically, the objec­
tives are threefold:

1. To define the concept and introduce a typology of Digital Twins;

2. To propose a conceptual framework, i.e. a systematic classification of 
concepts, for designing and implementing Digital Twins;  
3. To apply and validate the conceptual framework to smart farming in 
a multiple case study of the European IoF2020 project.

In the remainder of this paper we first introduce the research 
methodology in Section 2. The next chapters describe the results of our 
study. The domain analysis in Section 3 defines the concept of Digital 
Twins, develops a typology of Digital Twins including distinct control 
capabilities, and introduces the usage of Digital Twins in the context of 
smart farming. Section 4 describes the conceptual framework devel­
oped, which comprises a control model based on a general systems 
approach and an enabling information architecture for Digital Twin 
systems. Section 5 describes the application of the conceptual frame­
work to five smart farming use cases of the European IoF2020 project. 
The control model and implementation model of one of these use cases 
are described in more detail. Finally, the main findings are summarized 
and discussed in Section 6.

2. Methodology

The development of a conceptual framework is typically a design- 
oriented methodology that aims at solving a certain type of problem 
by constructing a new artefact (Hevner et al., 2004; Van Aken, 2004; 
March and Storey, 2008). The design artefact developed in this paper is a 
conceptual framework for the design and implementation of Digital 
Twins in farm management. The concept of Digital Twins is relatively 
new and complex. A case study is a good approach to get a better un­
derstanding of such complex phenomena, which cannot be studied 
outside their rich, real-world context (Benbasat et al., 1987; Eisenhardt, 
1989; Yin, 2002). Hence, a multi-case study approach is adopted to 
evaluate the applicability of the presented framework in the context of 
smart farming.

Fig. 1. Adopted Research Methodology.

Table 1 
Overview of the use cases.

Trial/ 
sector 
Use Case (# and name 
IoF2020) 
Use case challenge 
Focal 
country 
Chain role 
Adopter type 
Conventional/ 
Organic

Arable 
1.1 Within-field 
management zoning 
defining specific field management zones by developing and 
linking sensing- and actuating devices with external data 
NL 
Farming, 
Logistics 
Early adopters 
and majority 
Both

Dairy 
2.2 Happy Cow 
improving dairy farm productivity through 3D cow activity 
sensing and cloud machine learning technologies 
NL 
Farming 
Early 
Adopters 
Both

Vegs 
4.2 Chain-integrated 
greenhouse production 
integrating the value chain and quality innovation by 
developing a full sensor-actuator-based system in tomato 
greenhouses

SP 
Farming, 
Logistics, 
Consumption

Majority 
Both

Vegs 
4.3 Added value weeding 
data 
boosting the value chain by harvesting weeding data of 
organic vegetables obtained by advanced visioning systems 
NL, AT 
Farming 
Majority 
Organic

Meat 
5.1 Pig farm management 
optimizing pig production management by interoperable on- 
farm sensors and slaughterhouse data 
BE, NL 
Farming, 
Processing, 
Consumption

Both 
Both

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

3

The case study was carried out as part of the European IoF2020 
project in close interaction with involved business partners (Verdouw 
et al., 2017). The project included 19 IoT use cases that were organized 
in five coherent trials that aim to address the most relevant challenges 
for the concerned sub sector (Verdouw et al., 2019). We have selected 
cases that were expected to be appropriate for illustrating the use of the 
Digital Twin concept, especially due to including dynamic mirroring of 
real and virtual objects by using IoT technologies. In total five cases were 
selected as being representative for different agricultural sub-sectors 
(Table 1). 
More specifically, the research was organized in three phases 
(Fig. 1): (i) domain analysis, (ii) framework design and (iii) application 
to the cases (Fig. 1). 
Firstly, the research started with a domain analysis to develop key 
concepts based on a narrative literature review in the Scopus database 
and Google Scholar. We first searched for papers that include Digital 
Twin or Digital Twins in the title. We selected papers that thoroughly 
define the concept and review papers. Case studies that only mention 
Digital Twin without a more elaborate definition were excluded from 
the study. The concept of Digital Twins is relatively new and as a 
consequence it is used in different meanings. The definition study has 
therefore identified main perspectives and definitions on Digital Twins 
in literature, especially in the Product Lifecycle Management and 
Internet of Things domain. Based on this analysis, we have developed a 
typology of Digital Twins, including distinct control capabilities. Finally, 
the domain analysis has reviewed existing literature on the usage of 
Digital Twins in the context of smart farming. At this, we searched for 
papers that on the one hand include Digital Twin in the title and on the 
other hand agriculture or farming in the title, abstract or the keywords

section. Non-English and non-accessible papers were excluded from the 
study. 
Secondly, a conceptual framework was developed for designing and 
implementing Digital Twins in farm management. This paper focuses on 
providing a sound conceptual basis for the implementation of Digital 
Twins in smart farming, including the management aspects of using 
Digital Twins to plan, monitor, control and optimize farm processes. It is 
beyond the scope of this paper to develop a detailed reference archi­
tecture that can be used to model and realize Digital Twin-based infor­
mation systems. For this reason, the framework includes two model 
types that represent the essence of a Digital Twin from a management 
viewpoint (control model) and from an information technology view­
point (implementation model). The control model is based on a general 
systems approach. A control model represents the control functions 
needed to ensure that a system’s objectives are achieved, even if dis­
turbances occur, and information flows among these functions. Based on 
the literature review, the control model for object virtualization of 
Verdouw et al. (2015) was selected as a basis of this view. The imple­
mentation model classifies technical functionalities into different tech­
nical layers ranging from device layer to application layer, as such it 
provides an overview of the technical architecture. Based on the liter­
ature review, the IoT-A reference architecture was selected as a basis of 
this view (Carrez et al., 2013). 
Thirdly, the conceptual framework was applied to cases. We have 
adopted the case study empirical evaluation protocol as discussed by 
Runeson and H¨ost (2008). The protocol consists of the following steps: 
(1) case study design (2) preparation for data collection (3) execution 
with data collection on the studied case (4) analysis of collected data (5) 
reporting. Table 2 presents the case study design steps for the selected 
cases. The primary purpose of the case study is to understand the 
applicability of the presented Digital Twin framework in smart farming. 
The data were collected by desk research of use case documentation and 
interviews with the lead architect of every use case. The interviews were 
conducted based on a semi-structured questionnaire comprising ques­
tions in three categories: i) use case definition, including the problem 
context, core idea, objective, development status, etc.; ii) use case 
mapping, including main business processes targeted, objects addressed, 
main actors using the envisaged system; and iii) use case information 
architecture, including the main functionalities/services to be provided 
to end-users, non-functional requirements, technology components 
envisioned, reusability, privacy/security, standards usage and available 
documentation. Subsequently, the researchers designed case-specific

Fig. 2. Role of Digital Twins during the Product Life Cycle.

Table 2 
Case study design.

Case study design 
activity 
Case study

Goal 
Assessing the applicability of the Digital Twin framework 
in smart farming 
Research Questions 
How applicable is the adopted Digital Twin design 
approach? 
Background and 
source 
Meetings and interviews; technical reports; official project 
deliverables 
Data Collection 
Independent data collection based on document analysis 
Data Analysis 
Qualitative data analysis

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

4

control model and technical layer models for the use cases by using the 
conceptual framework as designed in phase 2. The resulting case- 
specific models were reviewed by the use case leader and iteratively 
refined by the research analyst. Finally, generic implications were 
abstracted from the case study findings and incorporated in the 
framework. 
The remainder of the paper introduces the results following the 
research steps as described above.

3. Definition and typology of Digital Twins

3.1. What is a Digital Twin?

The principles behind the Digital Twin vision origin from the Product 
Lifecycle Management domain (Grieves, 2005). From this perspective, 
there is a strong need to integrate all product-related information in a 
comprehensive product management system that can be accessed by any 
user in any stage of the Product Life Cycle, for example for through-life 
performance information, design optimization and manufacturing sys­
tem improvement (Philpotts, 1996; Kovacs et al., 1998; Sudarsan et al., 
2005; Schleich et al., 2017). It was proposed to use a digital counterpart 
of each physical product as a central means to manage product data 
along the product life cycle. In the beginning of the century, Michael 
Grieves argued in a presentation to industry that a digital informational 
construct about a physical system could be created as an entity on its 
own (Grieves and Vickers, 2017). This virtual system contains all in­
formation about the physical system and it is linked with that physical 
system through the entire lifecycle of the system (Grieves and Vickers, 
2017). NASA introduced the concept Digital Twin for this idea (Mike 
Shafto et al., 2012), which was an ultra-high fidelity simulation of the 
space vehicle that would allow the engineers on earth to mirror the 
precise and actual conditions of the real vehicle during the mission 
(Glaessgen and Stargel, 2012; Boschert and Rosen, 2016). 
In essence, Digital Twins are virtual, digital equivalents of physical 
objects (Grieves and Vickers, 2017; Fuller et al., 2020). They are real- 
time and remotely connected to real objects and provide rich repre­
sentations of these objects and its context. Such Digital Twins go beyond 
static product designs, like CAD models, but comprise dynamic behav­
iour (Boschert and Rosen, 2016; Grieves and Vickers, 2017). This dy­
namic nature of Digital Twins may include the representation of current 
behaviour of real-life objects, but also the simulation or prediction of 
future behaviour and the recollection of historical behaviour (Verdouw 
et al., 2015; Boschert and Rosen, 2016).

A Digital Twin can already be created in the design phase of an ob­
ject’s lifecycle, enhancing the creative phase of inventing new products 
and elaborating it into a detailed product model (see Fig. 2). In this 
stage, a Digital Twin allows early and efficient assessment of conse­
quences of design decisions on the quality and function of products 
reducing the need to develop costly physical prototypes (Grieves and 
Vickers, 2017; Schleich et al., 2017). After the design phase, a physical 
stage is entered, in which the Digital Twin comes into existence. A 
physical object is produced based on the designed Digital Twin, which is 
updated in case of any deviations. During operational usage, the current 
and historical state and conditions of a physical product are monitored 
by using sensors and AutoID devices. Moreover, the Digital Twin can be 
used to remotely control an object by using actuators. Finally, the 
disposal phase takes place, in which the physical object is disposed, but 
the conceptual object may remain for some period e.g. for traceability, 
compliance and learning. 
While originating from Product Lifecycle literature, a key technology 
for realizing Digital Twins is the Internet of Things (Marr, 2017). The 
interaction between real/physical and digital/virtual objects is an 
essential concept behind the Internet of Things. In the IoT, physical 
entities have digital counterparts; things themselves become context- 
aware and they can sense, communicate, act, interact with their digi­
tal counterparts and others, exchange data, information and knowledge 
(Sundmaeker et al., 2010). These counterparts are twins of the physical 
objects and can be linked to and synchronized with the physical object 
throughout their lifecycle (Verdouw et al., 2015; Canedo, 2016; Grieves 
and Vickers, 2016). The Internet acts as a storage and communication 
infrastructure that holds a virtual representation of things linking rele­
vant information with the object (Uckelmann et al., 2011). As such, 
Digital Twins serve as central hubs of object information, which 
combine and update data continuously from a wide range of sources, as 
illustrated in Fig. 3 (Verdouw et al., 2013). 
The emergence of Digital Twins in literature has resulted in various 
definitions both from a Product Life Cycle (PLC) and an Internet of 
Things (IoT) perspective (see Table 3) and is discussed below. 
In the IoT literature, the digital representation of physical objects 
using sensing technologies is highlighted. In the PLC literature, the 
emphasis is on mirroring real-life objects across their lifecycle, including 
simulation of expected object behaviour. In this paper we combine both 
perspectives and use the following definition: “A Digital Twin is a dy­
namic representation of a real-life object that mirrors its states and 
behaviour across its lifecycle and that can be used to monitor, analyze 
and simulate current and future states of and interventions on these

Fig. 3. Digital Twin in the Internet of Things.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

5

objects, using data integration, artificial intelligence and machine 
learning.” More specifically, based on literature as listed in Table 3, the 
following essential characteristics of Digital Twins can be addressed:

• Timeliness: a Digital Twin reflects its physical twin in (near) real- 
time, which means that state changes of the physical object are 
(immediately) detected and synchronized with its Digital Twin 
(Verdouw et al., 2015; Dur˜ao et al., 2018; Mikell and Clark, 2018; 
Tao et al., 2018; Knibbe et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019); 
• Fidelity: the reliability and security of a Digital Twin must be un­

questionable, allowing to blindly trust Digital Twins for decision 
making (Verdouw et al., 2015; Dur˜ao et al., 2018; Tao et al., 2018);  
• Integration: a Digital Twin integrates data from different aspects of 
the physical object and ensures convergence in a consistent format 
(Schleich et al., 2017; Kritzinger et al., 2018; Tao et al., 2018; Park 
et al., 2019);  
• Intelligence: Digital Twins do not only depict object data, but also 
include algorithms that describe, analyze or predict the behaviour of 
their physical twins (Glaessgen and Stargel, 2012; Schleich et al., 
2017; Dur˜ao et al., 2018; Kritzinger et al., 2018; Knibbe et al., 2019; 
Park et al., 2019; Shaw and Fruhlinger, 2019); 
• Complexity: Digital Twins can mirror different types of physical ob­

jects, including products, components, living and non-living re­
sources, components and processes (Marr, 2017; Saddik, 2018). 
Moreover, Digital Twins may consider multiple interdependent ob­
jects as well as sub systems at different levels of granularity 
(Glaessgen and Stargel, 2012; Verdouw et al., 2016b; Grieves and 
Vickers, 2017).

3.2. Digital Twin typology

The focus of Digital Twins is on the usage phase of the lifecycle 
(Fig. 2) in which Digital Twins are connected to their real-life physical 
twins. During that phase, Digital Twins can be used to monitor the actual 
state of objects, prescribe desired states, predict future states, and to 
remotely correct the state of real-life objects. Before the usage stage, 
Digital Twins can already be created to define and simulate the states 
and behaviour of its real-life twins that are not yet born. Last, after the 
usage phase, Digital Twins will remain conceptually alive and can be 
used to recollect the historical states of real-life objects. As a result, we 
defined a typology of six distinct Digital Twins (based on Porter and 
Heppelmann, 2014; Verdouw et al., 2015; Hagerty, 2016; Verdouw 
et al., 2016b; Grieves and Vickers, 2017; Redelinghuys et al., 2019; 
Lepenioti et al., 2020):

• Imaginary Digital Twin: a conceptual entity that depicts an object that 
does not yet exist in real-life. It defines the information needed to 
materialize its physical twin including for example functional re­
quirements, 3D product models, material and resource specifica­
tions, production models, and disposal and recycling specifications 
(Verdouw et al., 2015; Grieves and Vickers, 2017). Imaginary twins

Table 3 
Digital Twin definitions classified into two perspectives: Internet of Things (IoT) 
and Product Life Cycle (PLC); further discussion in text.

Source 
Definition Digital Twin 
Main 
perspective

Boschert and 
Rosen, 2016

A Digital Twin is a comprehensive physical 
and functional description of a component, 
product or system, which includes more or 
less all information which could be useful in 
all—the current and subsequent—lifecycle 
phases.

PLC

Dur˜ao et al., 
2018

Digital Twin is a multi-physical, multi-scale 
and probabilistic simulation model of a 
complex product. It uses updated sensors and 
physical models to mirror physical life in the 
digital world and vice versa.

PLC

Glaessgen and 
Stargel, 2012

A Digital Twin is an integrated multi-physics, 
multiscale, probabilistic simulation of an as- 
built vehicle or system that uses the best 
available physical models, sensor updates, 
fleet history, etc., to mirror the life of its 
corresponding flying twin.

PLC

Fuller et al., 2020 
The effortless integration of data between a 
physical and virtual machine in either 
direction.

IoT

Grieves and 
Vickers, 2017

The Digital Twin is a set of virtual 
information constructs that fully describes a 
potential or actual physical manufactured 
product from the micro atomic level to the 
macro geometrical level. At its optimum, any 
information that could be obtained from 
inspecting a physical manufactured product 
can be obtained from its Digital Twin.

PLC

Knibbe et al., 
2019

Digital Twins are computational 
representations of both living and non-living 
objects and processes. They can be used to 
describe, analyze and simulate current and 
future states of and interventions in these 
objects, using data integration, artificial 
intelligence and machine learning.

IoT

Marr, 2017 
A Digital Twin is a virtual model of a process, 
product or service. This pairing of the virtual 
and physical worlds allows analysis of data 
and monitoring of systems to head off 
problems before they even occur, prevent 
downtime, develop new opportunities and 
even plan for the future by using simulations.

IoT

Mikell and Clark, 
2018

The Digital Twin is the virtual representation 
of a physical object or system across its life- 
cycle. It uses real-time data and other sources 
to enable learning, reasoning, and 
dynamically recalibrating for improved 
decision making.

PLC/IoT

Saddik, 2018 
A Digital Twin is a digital replica of a living or 
non-living physical entity. By bridging the 
physical and the virtual world, data is 
transmitted seamlessly allowing the virtual 
entity to exist simultaneously with the 
physical entity.

IoT

Schleich et al., 
2017

The Digital Twin is not one complete model 
of the physical product, but a set of linked 
operation data artefacts and simulation 
models, which are of suitable granularity for 
their intended purpose and evolve 
throughout the product life-cycle. Thus, the 
Digital Twin not only serves representation 
purposes but is also applicable for making 
predictions about the expected product 
behaviour, while the granularity of the 
simulation models fits to their purpose and 
evolves from early design stages, where 
simple product models are used to decide 
about product concepts, to detail design, 
where sophisticated simulation models 
support the dimensioning and design of parts 
and subassemblies.

PLC

Table 3 (continued)

Source 
Definition Digital Twin 
Main 
perspective

Shaw and 
Fruhlinger, 
2019

A Digital Twin is a computer program that 
takes real-world data about a physical object 
or system as inputs and produces as outputs 
predications or simulations of how that 
physical object or system will be affected by 
those inputs.

IoT

Verdouw et al., 
2015

A virtual object can be defined as ‘a digital 
representation of an object, with a unique 
identification, that can be trusted, possesses 
the property of integrity, is timely available, 
and can be used for the intended purpose’.

IoT

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

6

can also simulate the behaviour of designed, not yet existing, objects 
between tolerance norms (Grieves and Vickers, 2017).  
• Monitoring Digital Twin: a digital representation of the actual state, 
behaviour and trajectory of a real-life physical object. It is connected 
(near) real-time to its physical twin and is used to monitor its con­
dition, operation, and external environment. A monitoring Digital 
Twin can be both descriptive, providing insight in what happens or 
happened with the connected real-life object, and diagnostic, 
explaining why it happens or happened by relating the object to 
contextual data.  
• Predictive Digital Twin: a digital projection of the future states and 
behaviour of physical objects using predictive analytics, such as 
statistical forecasting, simulation and machine learning methods. 
Prediction is done dynamically based on (near) real-time data of the 
physical twin.  
• Prescriptive Digital Twin: a smart digital object that adds intelligence 
for recommending corrective and preventive actions on the real-life 
objects usually based on optimization algorithms and expert heu­
ristics. Prescriptive twins use the output of monitoring and predictive 
twins as an input to suggest which courses of action need to be taken 
to reach a favourable outcome (Hagerty, 2016). The decisions on the 
recommended actions still are taken by humans, who also trigger the 
remote or on-site execution of interventions.  
• Autonomous Digital Twin: operates autonomously and fully controls 
the behaviour of real-life objects without on-site or remote inter­
vention by humans. Autonomous twins also can become self- 
adaptive systems that are able to learn about their environment, 
self-diagnose their own service needs, and adapt to users’ prefer­
ences (Porter and Heppelmann, 2014; Verdouw et al., 2016b).  
• Recollection Digital Twin: maintains the complete history of the 
physical object, which no longer exists in real-life. As such, recol­
lection twins form the digital memory of e.g. a farm. This type of 
Digital Twins is often neglected in literature, but it is increasingly 
important for reducing the environmental impact of disposals and for 
optimization of the next generation objects (Grieves and Vickers, 
2017). In the context of farming, recollection twins are also of crucial 
importance for tracing products to its source in case of food safety 
issues and for sustainability compliance.

One should notice that the above listed properties are not indepen­
dent and a Digital Twin do not necessarily belong to one category but 
may combine features of different types. For example, Digital Twins 
during the usage phase build upon each other’s capabilities. An auton­
omous Digital Twin will typically also be a prescriptive Digital Twin, a 
predictive twin usually also includes predictive capabilities, and a pre­
dictive twin can also include a monitoring Digital Twin. 
So far we have defined the concept of Digital Twins and introduced a 
typology of Digital Twins based on generic literature in the Product Life 
Cycle and IoT domain. In the remainder of this section we introduce the 
usage of Digital Twins in the context of smart farming.

3.3. Digital Twins in farm management

Farming is a highly complex and dynamic domain. Production pro­
cesses are inherently dynamic because they depend on natural condi­
tions, such as weather, diseases, soil conditions, seasonability and 
climate (Fountas et al., 2013; Trienekens et al., 2014). Moreover, 
farmers have to deal with critical demands from consumers and society 
concerning food security, food safety, sustainability and health. As a 
consequence, farms should not only be very efficient, but also have to 
meet high quality and environmental standards and should adapt to 
changing market conditions. This imposes high requirements on the 
managerial tasks of farmers (Sørensen et al., 2010; Fountas et al., 2013). 
They constantly have to reassess production strategies and to reschedule 
planned activities based on timely monitoring of farm operations in 
order to achieve their goals.

As argued in the introduction section, Digital Twins can significantly 
enhance the needed control capabilities by enabling the decoupling of 
physical and information aspects of farm management (Fig. 4). How­
ever, implementing Digital Twins in farm management is a challenging 
task for (at least) three reasons (Verdouw et al., 2016b). 
First of all, the highly dynamic production system in agriculture 
(process dynamics) poses requirements that go beyond many other 
sectors concerning the capabilities of Digital Twins to mirror dynamic 
behaviour. In such a dynamic environment, it is really challenging to get 
seamless access to object data while ensuring the integrity of data and 
respecting usage rights, safety and security. Furthermore, real-time 
synchronization can be complicated in rural areas, which often have 
limited coverage and bandwidth. 
Second, agricultural products are living objects that inherently are 
diverse and are characterized by complex behaviour. Moreover, farms 
don’t have one Digital Twin of concern for smart farming, but they are 
composed of a large variety of interrelated objects (object complexity). 
Main objects are i) inputs including seeds, feed, fertilizers or pesticides, 
ii) throughputs including objects in production (e.g. growing crops or 
animals) and resources including fields, stables, machinery and 
personnel, and iii) agricultural output including harvested (lots of) 
crops, animals ready to be slaughtered, etc. Digital Twins of a fine 
granularity level, e.g. up to individual plants or animals, would add 
more value, but are also more difficult to implement, which results in 
higher costs. In case of a fine granularity, a key challenge is to manage 
the interdependences between (sub) Digital Twins at different granu­
larity levels. 
Third, farms are part of a dynamic network and share data with many 
stakeholders including customers, input suppliers, farmer cooperatives, 
advisors, contractors, and certification and inspection organizations 
(network dynamics). These stakeholders may also have access to the 
farmer’s Digital Twins, but limited to the information that they need. 
This implies that there must be interoperable solutions for providing 
external access to specific views on Digital Twins in a secure and trusted 
way. Vice versa, external stakeholders can enrich farm Digital Twins 
with a wealth of (3rd party) archives such as historical and forecasted 
meteorological data, satellite data, soil-, water- and air-analyses, etc. 
There should be proper mechanisms in place to dynamically integrate 
these data in farm Digital Twins. 
Digital Twins can be seen as a new phase in smart farming. It is 
building upon existing technologies especially for precision farming, 
Internet of Things and simulation. As a consequence, there are multiple 
applications in the agricultural domain, although often not framed as 
Digital Twins. However, most of these applications are still rather basic 
forms of Digital Twins, focusing for example on digital representation in 
a cloud dashboard. More advanced applications, including e.g. predic­
tive and prescriptive capabilities across the lifecycle, are still in an early

Fig. 4. Virtual control of farming enabled by Digital Twins.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

7

stage of development. In our literature review, we only found a few 
explorative studies and some case studies that frame an IoT-based sys­
tem as a Digital Twin, without a detailed motivation or definition of the 
concept. These papers, which are discussed below, are all congress pa­
pers, except one book chapter. 
To the best of our knowledge, Verdouw and Kruize (2017) were the 
first who explored the application of Digital Twins in farm management. 
The paper considers Digital Twins from an Internet of Things perspec­
tive, in which physical objects have virtual, digital equivalents that are 
real-time and remotely connected. Illustrated by six cases of the FIWARE 
Accelerator program, the paper shows that Digital Twins are already 
implicitly used in smart farming, but existing applications mostly focus 
on basic monitoring capabilities. The authors argue that these capabil­
ities establish a basis for optimization, simulation and decision support 
based on on-line Digital Twins.

Jo et al. (2018) conducted a feasibility study on using Digital Twins 
in pig farms to improve animal welfare. They introduce thre so-called 
Digital Twin platforms (Prefix, Ditto and Watson) and proposed a 
design smart livestock farming system using such a Digital Twin plat­
form. The paper states that a Digital Twin is the digital replica of the real 
world, but it does not further elaborate on the concept, neither it de­
scribes how the designed system supports Digital Twins.

Monteiro et al. (2018) present a technical IoT-based model and a 
prototype to implement Digital Twins in vertical farming. Digital Twins 
are defined as digital mirrors of physical objects. The Digital Twin 
designed in the paper is envisioned to support the lifecycle of planning, 
operation, monitoring, and optimization of vertical farms. The focus of 
the prototype is on sensing and controlling the conditions via light and 
misting.

Alves et al. (2019) developed an IoT-based prototype to sense field 
conditions including soil moisture, air temperature and humidity, and to 
visualize this information in a dashboard. This prototype is called a 
Digital Twin, in which data flows automatically between a physical and 
a digital object. The authors argue that a Digital Twin enables farmers to 
make better decisions and to decrease the environmental impact in 
water, land and soil resources. 
In the research of Kampker et al. (2019), a Digital Twin is an artificial 
potato, which is planted in the field and harvested just as real potatoes. 
The ‘digital’ potato is equipped with sensors that measure its treatment, 
especially shocks, blows and rotation speed, etc. This information is used 
to adjust the settings of the harvesting machine, thus minimizing dam­
age to the potatoes. Subsequently, the digital potato is synchronized 
with a cloud platform to enable smart services like potato price and field 
revenue estimations (Maaß et al., 2018).

Linz et al. (2019) applied Digital Twins in the development of field 
robots, for example for phenotyping and crop treatments in vineyards. 
They simulate the autonomous behaviour of robots in a 3D environment 
using real-time data and mirror the simulated Digital Twin to operate 
the real-life robot. This results in shorter lead times of development, 
better evaluation of sensor behaviour and reducing the needed field 
experiments to evaluate phenotypes or test the effects of crop 
treatments.

Skobelev et al. (2020) propose a multi-agent approach to develop­
ment of Digital Twins of plants. A plant Digital Twin is defined as “a 
computer model that imitates its life cycle and synchronizes with the 
living plant using examinations by agronomists and data on environ­
mental conditions (weather, soil, etc.)”. 
Finally, Sreedevi and Santosh Kumar (2020) argue that there are 
relatively few studies about Digital Twins in agriculture compared to 
other domains. Furthermore, they discuss the potential contribution of 
Digital Twins in hydroponics farming, especially for predicting probable 
failures and optimizing the whole farming system, including the man­
agement of nutrients, pH values, pathogens and weeds. 
Based on the domain analysis introduced above, the next section 
describes the conceptual framework developed for designing and 
implementing Digital Twins.

4. Conceptual framework Digital Twins

The conceptual framework of this paper should provide a sound 
conceptual basis for implementation of Digital Twins in smart farming, 
including the management aspects of using Digital Twin to plan, 
monitor, control and optimize farm processes. More specifically, the 
following basic requirements are defined based on the literature study of 
the previous section:

1. The framework must address the cyber-physical control cycle of 
smart farming that seamlessly integrates sensing and monitoring, 
smart analyses & planning and smart control of farm operations for 
all relevant farm processes (‘whole farm management perspective’);  
2. The framework must support the entire life cycle of farm objects and 
consequently it must include the six distinct Digital Twins defined, i. 
e. Imaginary, Monitoring, Predictive, Prescriptive, Autonomous and 
Recollection Digital Twins; 
3. The framework must support the implementation of essential char­

acteristics of Digital Twins, i.e. timeliness, fidelity, integration, in­
telligence, and complexity;  
4. The framework must address the specific challenges of implementing 
Digital Twins in farm management, i.e. farm object complexity, farm 
network dynamics and farm process dynamics.

The designed framework includes two model types that represent the 
essence of a Digital Twin from a management viewpoint and from an 
information technology viewpoint. This section introduces both models: 
i) a control model for Digital Twins based on a general systems approach 
and ii) an implementation model that provides an overview of the 
technical architecture for implementing Digital Twins.

4.1. Control model

4.1.1. Farm control from a systems perspective 
Control is a basic concept in system dynamics. It ensures that the 
system’s objectives are achieved, even if disturbances occur. The basic 
idea of control is the introduction of a controller that measures system 
behaviour and corrects if measurements are not compliant with system 
objectives (de Leeuw, 1997). Farm processes are ‘in control’ if the per­
formance of its operations remain in a steady state. Therefore, the ac­
tivities of these processes must include the cybernetic control functions 
necessary to demonstrate ‘cybernetic validity’. Basically, this implies 
that they must have a feedback loop in which a norm, sensor,

Fig. 5. Basic control model.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

8

discriminator, decision maker, and effector are present (de Leeuw, 1997; 
Int Veld, 2002). Fig. 5 depicts these control functions in a basic control 
model. The object system executes activities that transform input into 
the desired output. In farming systems these are the business processes 
of the involved actors that transform input material to final products at 
the end customer’s location. The sensor function measures the actual 
performance of the object system. The discriminator function compares 
the measured performance with the norms that specify the desired 
performance (system objectives concerning e.g. quantity, quality and 
lead time aspects) and signals deviations to the decision-making func­
tion. Based on a control model of the object system, the decision-making 
function selects the appropriate intervention to remove the signalled 
disturbances. Finally, the effector implements the chosen intervention to 
correct the object system’s performance.

4.1.2. Farm control with Digital Twins 
Digital Twins allow farmers to decouple the physical flows from in­
formation aspects of farm operations (Verdouw and Kruize, 2017). 
Decoupling of control means that the measurements of the object sys­
tem’s state are translated into a Digital Twin as visualized in Fig. 6. The 
control cycle starts with measuring the object system’s state by the 
sensor function and with acquiring relevant external data (Verdouw 
et al., 2015). These data are then translated into a virtual representation 
of the controlled object system (model-based transformation) on the 
basis of a meta model. The Digital Twin includes all information relevant 
for the supported purposes of usage (i.e. control objectives) as specified 
in a meta model. Dependent on a specific purpose of usage, a virtual 
view may then filter irrelevant information and present it in such a way 
that it can be processed optimally by specific users (model-based

Fig. 6. Conceptual model for control based on Digital Twins, based on Verdouw et al. (2015).

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

9

transformation) on the basis of a meta model. The next control function 
is the decision-making function, which compares a virtual view on the 
object system with a specific control norm. Next, the decision-making 
function selects appropriate interventions for deviations based on its 
Decision Support Model, similarly as in conventional control systems. 
Lastly, the selected intervention is communicated with the effector 
function, either directly or via the Digital Twin using remote actuator 
systems.

4.1.3. Impact Digital Twin typology on control model 
The distinct categories of Digital Twins as introduced previously 
serve different control purposes. Fig. 7 provides a summarized overview 
of the main differences in the control model (adapted from (Verdouw 
et al., 2015). 
Imaginary Digital Twins represent the state and simulate the behav­
iour of reference objects that are not yet connected to objects that 
physically exist in the real-world. A reference object is a conceptual 
entity that specifies a typical object from the perspective of defining user 
requirements. Usually it is a combination of desired features that can be 
based on past experiences or they can be the result of a design process. It 
is also possible to select and depict a representative physical object 
(typical objects). Moreover, scenario data can be used to simulate the 
expected behaviour of reference objects based on prediction models. 
Monitoring Digital Twins represent the current and historic state and 
behaviour of objects that exist physically in the real-world. The physical 
objects are equipped with tags for identification, usually barcodes or 
RFID transponders, and with sensors that measure dynamic properties of 
physical things. The virtual object uses these sensor data to generate a 
representation of the object based on a meta model, which might be 
implicit. Usually, the sensor data are combined with external data to

enrich the virtual representation. 
Predictive Digital Twins project the future state and behaviour of real- 
life physical objects. The future states are forecasted by using a predic­
tion model and subsequently a future projection of its behaviour is 
generated in conformance to a meta model. The prediction model uses 
information of the current and historic state of the objects, measured by 
sensors and AutoID devices, usually in combination with external data, 
e.g. weather forecasts or congestion information. 
Prescriptive Digital Twins: represent the effects of interventions in a 
present Digital Twin on a future Digital Twin. The interventions can 
either correct a current issue as identified by a monitoring twin (reac­
tive) or an expected future issue as forecasted by a predictive twin 
(proactive). Simulation of interventions in prescriptive twins allow for 
precise and realistic evaluation of corrective and preventive measure 
before implementation. The decision still is taken by humans and also 
the intervention is done without using a Digital Twin. 
Autonomous Digital Twins: go beyond prescriptive twins because also 
the decision and implementation is done autonomously via digital rep­
resentations. Prescriptive twins identify control issues based on moni­
toring and predictive twins and decide on optimal interventions based 
on prescriptive twins. Subsequently the selected intervention is trans­
lated into actuator instructions, that are implemented remotely. As such, 
autonomous twins run the complete control loop without any human 
involvement, but based on decision support models and control norms of 
humans. Autonomous twins can also be self-learning, which means that 
decision algorithms are optimized based on the measured response of 
real objects on control measures. 
Recollection Digital Twins: represent the past state and behaviour of 
objects that no longer exist in the real-world. Like imaginary twins they 
represent reference objects, i.e. conceptual entities, but the nature of the

Fig. 7. Simplified Control Models of the Digital Twin Typology (excluding the Discriminator and Decision Making control functions).

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

10

representation is completely different since there has been a connected 
real object in the past. Recollection twins have to depict this historical 
object in an accurate and reliable way, and as such they use all relevant 
data about this object.

4.1.4. Integrated control model for Digital Twins 
The previous sections have defined distinct control mechanisms of 
six Digital Twin categories. Fig. 8 incorporates these mechanisms into 
the control model. This model integrates all six Digital Twin defined 
categories, but not all elements will be relevant if less categories are 
applied. The integrated control model especially adds different types of 
the representation, i.e. imaginary, present, future and past digital ob­
jects. Imaginary digital objects represent reference objects that do not 
yet exist. Present digital objects represent the current state and behav­
iour of real-life, physical objects. Future digital objects project the

expected state and behaviour of objects. Past digital objects represent 
the historical state and behaviour of real-life objects or objects that no 
longer exist in the real-world. Furthermore a reference object is added to 
allow for the representation of conceptual entities that come into exis­
tence in the design phase of the product life cycle. Once the conceptual 
entity is materialized, the real object can be connected to the virtual 
object. This conceptual entity remains after the disposal of the real-life 
object at the end of the lifecycle. Reference object can also be relevant 
during the usage phase. An example is the usage of imaginary resources 
for planning purposes, which specify the type of resources and the 
properties necessary to do the job. Think of, for example, a virtual 
harvest machine having a certain capacity in specific weather and soil 
conditions. When the harvesting schedule becomes actual, a physical 
machine is chosen to do the job for the virtual one (having at least 
properties that match required ones).

Fig. 8. Integrated control model for Digital Twins.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

11

Finally, the interaction between the decision-maker function and the 
Digital Twins is elaborated. In prescriptive Digital Twins, intervention 
proposals based on decision support models are transformed into future 
Digital Twins. As such, the expected object changes of virtual in­
terventions are simulated. The decision maker uses this simulated in­
terventions to decide on the final intervention. Autonomous Digital 
Twins also translate this intervention decision into planned object 
changes and subsequently into actuator instructions. Autonomous twins 
remotely control the effector function that executes these instructions. 
So far, the concept of Digital Twins and its underlying complexity 
were defined. The next section will present a technical model that is 
designed to implement this concept.

4.2. Implementation model

This section proposes a technical model for the implementation of 
Digital Twins. A technical architecture describes the components of a 
system, interactions among components, and the interaction of a system 
as a whole with its environment (Trienekens et al., 2014). It is usually 
not drawn in one diagram but separated in multiple so-called architec­
ture views each of which describes an architecture according to specific 
stakeholders’ concerns (Clements et al., 2010). 
For the purpose of this paper, we focus on visualizing main func­
tionalities that are needed to implement the control model as developed 
in the previous section. Several technical architectures for Digital Twins 
are introduced recently. Schleich et al. (2017) proposed an abstract 
reference architecture that addresses some basic modelling principles 
for ‘twinning’ between the physical and virtual world properties, such as 
model scalability, interoperability, expansibility, and fidelity. Alam and 
Saddik (2017) developed a specific a Digital Twin architecture, that 
analytically describes key properties of cloud-based cyber-physical 
systems. Redelinghuys et al. (2019) designed an architecture for Digital 
Twins of manufacturing cells comprising six layers, including local data, 
gateways, cloud-based databases and a layer for emulations and 
simulations. 
These authors consider Digital Twins as a next step in IoT-based

cyber-physical systems. As a consequence the proposed architectures 
are similar to reference architectures developed in the IoT domain, in 
which virtual representation of objects have an important role. Impor­
tant IoT reference architectures include IoT-A, ITU-T and AIOTI (Ver­
douw et al., 2019). The Internet of Things—Architecture (IoT-A) 
provides a very in-depth definition of IoT’s information technology as­
pects (Carrez et al., 2013; Gubbi et al., 2013). The International Tele­
coms Unions (ITU) has developed an IoT Reference Model which 
provides a high level capability view of an IoT infrastructure (ITU-T, 
2016). The Alliance for IoT Innovation has defined a High Level IoT 
Architecture to achieve IoT semantic interoperability (AIOTI, 2018). In 
the present paper we adopted the IoT-A reference architecture because it 
most explicitly addresses virtual entities as a core element of the ar­
chitecture. The remainder of this section will introduce the IOT-A 
reference architecture and how it supports the implementation of Dig­
ital Twins.

4.2.1. The IoT-A reference model 
The Architectural Reference Model for the Internet of Things is 
developed by the European project IoT-A (Gubbi et al., 2013). Besides 
establishing a common understanding of the IoT domain, IoT-A aimed to 
provide essential building blocks and design choices for developing 
interoperable IoT system architectures. The reference model includes 
five different sub models: an IoT domain model, IoT information model, 
IoT functional model, IoT communication model and an IoT trust, se­
curity and privacy model (Bauer et al., 2013; Carrez et al., 2013). 
The ontological foundation is formed by the IoT Domain Model, 
which defines main concepts of the Internet of Things like Devices, IoT 
Services and Virtual Entities (VE), and how these concepts are related. 
Building upon these concepts, the IoT information model defines the 
structure (e.g. relations, attributes) of IoT related information in an IoT 
system on an abstract level. The Functional Model decomposes the main 
functionalities of IoT-based systems into groups in a layered view. The 
IoT Communication Model elaborates the technical communication for 
connecting the different elements of an IoT-based system, including a 
reference set of communication rules to build interoperable stacks. The

Fig. 9. Implementation model for Digital Twins, adopted from IoT-A (Carrez et al., 2013), Virtual Entity is replaced by Digital Twin Management.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

12

sub models are elaborated in very detailed architectural views and 
accompanied by guidelines. 
It can be concluded that the IoT-A is a very in-depth and rigorous 
reference model. It is beyond the scope of this paper to describe it into 
detail, but we focus on its IoT functional model (Fig. 9). For more details 
and the further technical implementation we refer to Bauer et al. (2013) 
and Carrez et al. (2013).

4.2.2. Digital Twin implementation model 
Basically, a Digital Twin architecture is composed of a physical ob­
ject in real space, a digital representation of this object in the virtual 
space and the connection between the virtual and real space for trans­
ferring data and information (Grieves and Vickers, 2017; Redelinghuys 
et al., 2019). As argued previously, IoT technologies enable this syn­
chronization of the physical and virtual worlds. The implementation 
model of our conceptual framework, based on the IoT-A functional 
model, addresses eight layers (Fig. 9). These layers range from a device

layer, which is attached to physical objects, to an application layer, 
which includes interaction with Digital Twin Users (based on Atzori 
et al., 2010; Bauer et al., 2013; Carrez et al., 2013; and Verdouw et al., 
2016a). 
The Device layer provides the hardware components that are attached 
to and directly interact with physical objects such as tags for unique 
identification, sensors and actuators. Important identification technol­
ogies used in agriculture include (multi-dimensional) barcodes and RFID 
tags (Verdouw et al., 2016a). Furthermore, a multitude of different 
sensors is used to measure dynamic properties of physical things 
including temperature, crop size, humidity, light, moisture, CO2, 
ammonia and pH values. Object sensing is also supported by mobile 
devices such as barcode/RFID readers and smartphones, which enable 
farmers to perform additional actions such as visual quality inspections. 
Furthermore, this layer includes remote sensing by satellites, aerial ve­
hicles, and ground based platforms. Small unmanned aerial systems (i.e. 
drones) are increasingly used to realize a high spatial and temporal

Table 5 
Implementation model overview of the investigated cases.

Case 
Within-field management 
zoning 
Happy Cow 
Chain-integrated 
greenhouse production 
Added value weeding data 
Pig farm management

Device layer 
Soil, crop and weather 
sensors, GPS tracker, 
actuators

Accelerometer sensor 
(neck mounted 
behaviour sensor)

Crop, Climate and Irrigation 
Sensors, Ventilation, 
Climate, Lighting and 
Fertigation Actuators

Weeder Sensors, Weeder 
Actuators, Weeder Terminal, 
Tractor 
Terminal GPS, Weather Station, 
Harvester Terminal

RFID tags and readers, water 
consumption, feed sensors 
consumption sensors, barn 
climate sensors

Communication 
layer 
ISOBUS Channel, LoRa 
Network 
Custom Farm LAN, Base 
Stations, Field Access 
Points

Wifi, GPRS/3G/4G Cellular, 
ethernet, Serial Bus 
Farm WLAN, Farm LAN, 
CANbus 
WIFI, GPRS, XMPP

IoT service layer 
ISOBUS Task Controller, 
ISOBUS 
VPN Concentrator 
Fog Computing Services, 
FIWARE IoT 
FireWire, SSD 
IoT Adapters, local IoT 
middleware 
IoT Process 
management 
layer

Modelling Services 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a

Service 
organisation 
Service Composition, 
Orchestration and 
Choreography

Service Composition, 
Orchestration and 
Choreography

Service Composition, 
Orchestration and 
Choreography

Service Composition, 
Orchestration and 
Choreography

Service Composition, 
Orchestration and 
Choreography 
Digital Twin 
management 
layer

Soil Map Service, Variable 
Rate Application Map, 
FIWARE Orion Context 
Broker

Fertility Prediction 
Service 
Health Prediction 
Service 
Herd Monitoring Service 
Data Fusion and Cloud 
Data Storage

Climate and Irrigation 
Setpoints Estimation 
Service, Diseases and 
Condensation 
Crop Monitoring Service, 
Dynamic Lighting Control 
Service, FIWARE Cloud Data 
Storage

Crop Growth Service, Yield 
Prediction Service, Machine 
Setup and Maintenance Service, 
Data Storage and Processing

Fusion Engine Service, Cloud 
Data Storage

Security layer 
Identity Management, 
Authorization, 
Authentication, Network 
Security

Identity Management, 
Authorization, 
Authentication, Network 
Security

Identity Management, 
Authorization, 
Authentication, Network 
Security

Identity Management, 
Authorization, Authentication, 
Network Security

Identity Management, 
Authorization, 
Authentication, Network 
Security 
Management layer 
Configuration, Fault, 
Reporting, Member, State 
Configuration, Fault, 
Reporting, Member, 
State

Configuration, Fault, 
Reporting, Member, State 
Configuration, Fault, Reporting, 
Member, State 
Configuration, Fault, 
Reporting, Member, State

Application layer 
Akkerweb/FarmMaps, 
365FarmNet, 
Configurable Dashboard,

IDA App, several FMIS’s 
Greenhouse Management 
Dashboard 
Farmer Tractor Application, 
Steketee Dashboard, Akkerweb/ 
FarmMaps, 365 FarmNet, 
AgLeader 
SMS Basic

IoT Dashboard, Business 
Intelligence Dashboard

Table 4 
Control model overview of the investigated cases.

Case 
Within-field management 
zoning 
Happy cow 
Chain-integrated greenhouse 
production 
Added value weeding data 
Pig farm 
management

Main objects 
Potato Crops, Field, 
Harvested Potatoes 
Cow, Herd, Field 
Tomato Crop, Greenhouse, 
Harvested Tomatoes, Truck 
Weeds, Lettuce Crops, Field, Weeding 
Machine, Harvested Lettuce 
Pig, Farm, 
Slaughterhouse 
Time 
dimension 
Present, Future 
Present, Future 
Present, Future 
Present, Future, Past 
Present, Future

Main farm 
processes 
Grow and Harvest Potatoes 
Produce Milk 
Grow, Harvest and Distribute 
Tomatoes 
Grow and Harvest Lettuce 
Fatten and Slaughter 
Pigs 
Digital Twin 
types 
Monitoring, Predictive, 
Prescriptive 
Monitoring, 
Predictive 
Monitoring, Predictive, Prescriptive 
Monitoring, Predictive, Prescriptive, 
Recollection 
Monitoring, 
Predictive

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

13

resolution and a high flexibility in image acquisition. Finally, in the 
device layer actuators are used to remotely operate objects such as 
tractor implements, climate control, irrigation, coolers, and lights. 
The Communication layer manages the interactions between different 
components and enables the communication from the devices to the IoT 
services. It provides capabilities for networking, connectivity and data 
transport and enables end-to-end communication that crosses different 
networking environments. 
The IoT Service layer contains services and functionalities for dis­
covery, look-up and name resolution of IoT Services. It can be used to get 
information retrieved from a sensor device or to deliver information to 
control actuator devices. 
The Digital Twin Management layer contains functions for interacting

with the IoT System on basis of virtual entities. It can give access to all 
the information about the Digital Twin, from sensor devices, databases 
or applications. Furthermore, it contains all the functionality needed for 
managing associations with the physical objects and monitoring their 
validity. 
The IoT Process Management layer provides an environment for the 
modelling and execution of IoT-aware processes. Deployment of process 
models to the execution environments is achieved by utilizing IoT Ser­
vices that are orchestrated in the Service Organisation layer. This layer 
acts as a communication hub between several other layers by composing 
and orchestrating services of different levels of abstraction. 
The Security layer is responsible for the security and privacy of the 
systems and its users. It includes components like authorization,

Fig. 10. Simplified control model of the weeding use case.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

14

authentication and identity management. 
The Management layer is focussed on the configuration of the system. 
It also reports faults and determines the overall state of the system. 
Finally, the Application layer provides the intelligence for specific 
control tasks based on virtual objects. It includes capabilities for usage of 
Digital Twins across its lifecycle. The different categories of Digital 
Twins are enabled by diverse technologies, including simulation and 
optimization tools, statistical forecasting, simulation and machine 
learning. This layer also includes the user interface for interacting with 
Digital Twins. The types of user interfaces can vary from 2D graphical 
user interfaces, as commonly used in personal computers, smartphones 
and tablets, to advanced 3D interfaces for Virtual and Augmented Re­
ality glasses. 
The remainder of this paper will illustrate the application of Digital 
Twins in agriculture by some cases of the IoF2020 project.

5. Application of Digital Twins in smart farming

5.1. Illustrative cases from IoF2020

The framework as presented in the previous sections is applied to five 
smart farming use cases of the IoF2020 project (Table 1). It is beyond the 
scope of this paper to exhaustively deal with the applied models for all 
cases. Therefore, we provide in Table 4 an overview of the applied 
control models and in Table 5 the applied implementation models. The 
models of the use case ‘Added value weeding data’ are described in more 
details as an illustrative example.

Table 4 provides an overview of the applied control models. Point of 
departure in all use cases is a particular farm crop or animal, i.e. potato, 
tomato, lettuce, cow or pig. These objects are nested in high-level ob­
jects, such as fields, greenhouses and stables. The plant use cases all also 
predict the expected output of the farming process, i.e. potatoes, to­
matoes or lettuce to be harvested. Two use cases also virtualize equip­
ment used, i.e. a weeding machine or truck. All use cases analysed 
combine multiple types of Digital Twins, starting with monitoring the 
actual state of objects and then predicting future states e.g. expected 
yields or animal health. Most of the use cases also include intelligence to 
advice interventions. The crop farming use cases also process these ad­
vices into prescriptive Digital Twins, e.g. by defining task maps. Most 
use cases focus on the usage phase of a lifecycle and do not include 
imaginary or recollection Digital Twins. Only the use case ‘Added value 
weeding data’ applies a recollection Digital Twin for optimisation of 
machine settings based on historical data about machine behaviour. 
None of the use cases have implemented yet autonomous Digital Twins.

Table 5 lists the main technical components that are used to imple­
ment the layers of the Digital Twin technical architecture. It shows that 
in the Device Layer all use cases apply domain-specific sensors and three 
use cases also use specific actuators. Most technologies for technical 
communication are based on standardized protocols of both conven­
tional technology such as wired networks and recent wireless IoT net­
works such as LoraNet. The use case ‘Happy cow’ has chosen to apply a 
custom-built network consisting of distributed access points that enable 
communication up to several kilometers. Also in the IoT Service layer a 
combination of technologies is used. Process-based orchestration of 
services is not yet addressed. Only the first use case ‘Within-field man­
agement zoning’ includes some Modelling Services. In the Digital Twin 
Management Layer all use cases provide services that combine and store 
data from diverse data sources and represent harmonized virtual en­
tities. These services also include intelligence for simulation or decision 
support dependent on the supported control functions (see Table 4). In 
the application layer, all use cases provide dedicated dashboards for the 
interaction with users and three of the use cases also integrate with 
existing farm management systems (e.g. Akkerweb/FarmMaps, 
365FarmNet, AgLeader). Finally, all use cases comprise some generic 
technical functions for the service organisation, security and 
management.

5.2. Overview of the use case ‘Added Value Weeding Data’

When growing organic vegetables, weeding is one of the most 
important and frequent activities to control both the quality of the field 
and its produce (Lockeretz, 2007). In recent years, automated intra-row 
weeding machines have entered the market, enhancing the weeding 
process significantly. The most advanced weeding machines use ma­
chine vision applications to distinguish crops from weeds. These camera 
data can not only be used for automated control of the weeding task, but 
also as a valuable information source for farm management. This use 
case uses these location-specific camera data of a weeding machine as a 
main data source to provide actual insights into the number of lettuce 
heads growing on the field, the plants’ growth status, weed prevalence 
and best harvesting moment. As such it creates Digital Twins of a field, 
plants and weeds to monitor crop growth and to predict the crop weight 
and size of lettuce.

5.3. Application of the control model

The applied control model of the use case ‘Added value weeding 
data’ is shown in Fig. 10. The main farming processes are sourcing and 
planting young lettuce plants, producing lettuce in the field, harvesting 
lettuce which is ready for consumption and delivering it to the market. 
The main physical objects involved are planting machines and young 
plants, fields containing weeds and growing lettuce, weeding machines, 
harvesting machines and harvested lettuces. 
The Digital Twins of this use case are used for monitoring weed 
pressure and crop growth, controlling the weeds to be removed and 
predicting the optimal moment of harvesting. To do so, the sensor 
function uses processed camera images to calculate crop parameters 
such as size. Furthermore, crop growth sensing adds weather data and 
field properties, including temperature, relative humidity, wind speed 
and direction, solar radiation and soil moisture (3 levels). The data 
acquisition function also includes external weather data. 
These data are then transformed into Digital Twins. The virtualisa­
tion in this use focusses on the field, which implies that the main Digital 
Twin is a high-precision and actual heat map of a field. A field map 
comprises weed density and the number and size of crops (present), and 
the expected final weight and crop size of the lettuce (future). Planting 
seedlings are excluded. The Digital Twins of the individual lettuce crops 
and weeds are used by farmers during the weeding activity and after­
wards the calculated parameters of every plant in the field are also 
available remotely. Furthermore, Digital Twins of the weeding machine 
is used to optimize machine settings afterwards (past). 
The discriminator function uses the Digital Twins of weeds and 
growing lettuces to monitor weed pressure and crop growth, i.e. crop 
size and crop distance. The decision maker function translates the weed 
pressure into a planning of the weeding activities. A lettuce growth 
model is used to predict the crop weight and size per field section. The 
user sets a target value for crop weight and then the optimal harvest 
moment is determined. Based on this information the optimal moment 
of harvesting is determined and the harvesting is planned. For lettuce, 
growers get paid by lettuce head in the right weight class. 
Finally, the effector function executes the planned weeding task. The 
weeds are automatically removed, controlled by the actuators in the 
weeding machine that apply machine instructions based on Digital Twin 
of the weeds. Because of the high-precision weed density maps, fields 
can be weeded partially, only where needed. Also the planned har­
vesting activities are executed by harvesting machines but they do not 
use customised machine instructions. 
The control cycle partly takes place on-site within the weeding ma­
chine. Camera data are directly processed into local Digital Twins that 
distinguish crops and weeds. These Digital Twins are then instantly 
translated to actuator instructions and the weeds are removed without 
human involvement. However, all other control activities are done 
remotely by farmers who interact with the Digital Twins via cloud-based

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

15

systems. The next section elaborates on how this is technically 
implemented.

5.4. Application of the implementation model to the weeding data use case

The technical implementation of the use case is visualized in Fig. 11. 
The Device layer includes sensors (especially the camera’s) and ac­
tuators that are embedded in the weeding machine, a weather station, 
and GPS connected to the tractor terminal. The data are directly pro­
cessed and stored on the terminals on the weeder and harvester ma­
chine. The processed parameters such as GPS-coordinates, time stamp, 
crop size, distance, and weed pressure, are logged and uploaded to cloud 
databases after having weeded a field. 
The Communication layer includes wired (CANBUS) interfaces and a 
wireless local farm network (LAN) for connecting the weeding machine, 
tractor and harvester and wireless network a for communication of 
machines and sensors with cloud systems (UMTS: 3G). 
The Digital Twin Management layer combines, stores, processes and 
updates all data related to the Digital Twins of fields, weeds, growing 
lettuce, lettuce to be harvested, and weeding machines. It provides ac­
cess to these twins for the farmer and machine vendor applications. The 
data storage and processing of the weeds and crops is done locally on the 
weeding machine. This layer also includes services needed to determine 
crop growth, to predict expected yield and to define optimal machine 
settings. 
The Application layer allows users to interact with Digital Twins. Via

the weeder user terminal, farmers can monitor weeds and growing let­
tuce in real-time and intervene if necessary (Fig. 12). Via cloud dash­
boards, farmers can monitor weed pressure, crop growth and expected 
yield on field level. For this purpose the use cases integrates with 
existing solutions for geo information and farm management. Fig. 13 
shows a crop growth example of the Akkerweb dashboard and Fig. 14 
shows a weed pressure example in 365FarmNet. Furthermore, a ma­
chine vendor’s dashboard can be used to configure and optimize ma­
chine settings. This is of crucial importance among others to correctly 
distinguish crops and weeds for different crop growth phases and light 
circumstances. 
The other layers comprise generic technical functions that are similar 
to other use cases and that are already introduced previously (in Section 
5.1).

6. Discussion and conclusions

6.1. Discussion

Digital Twins can be seen as a new phase in smart farming. Using 
Digital Twins as central means for farm management enables the 
decoupling of physical flows from its planning and control. As a 
consequence, farmers can manage operations remotely based on (near) 
real-time digital information instead of having to rely on direct obser­
vation and manual tasks on-site. This allows them to act immediately in 
case of (expected) deviations and to simulate the effect of interventions

Fig. 11. Digital Twin implementation model of the use case ‘Added Value Weeding Data’.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

16

based on real-life data. 
The main contribution of the paper is that it has proposed a con­
ceptual framework for designing and implementing Digital Twins for 
smart farming. The framework builds on an analysis of literature and a 
clarification of the concept of Digital Twins, which is still developing. An 
important novelty of the framework is that it adds a typology of Digital 
Twins based on the life cycle phases of the objects being virtualised. 
Depending on the perspective, the emphasis is currently often on 
monitoring or predictive Digital Twins. However, Digital Twins can 
already be created in the design phase of a life cycle and support the 
creation of its physical, real-life sibling. During operational usage, 
Digital Twins can not only be used to monitor and simulate the effects of 
interventions, but also to remotely control an object by using actuators. 
Finally, Digital Twins are also very valuable after disposal of a physical 
object e.g. for traceability, compliance and learning. So far, these 
distinct Digital Twin types are not explicitly addressed in the literature, 
which results in conceptual confusion. This paper has contributed to 
avoid this by introducing a typology and by defining the distinct control 
capabilities of each type in a control model. 
The case studies show that there are already applications in the 
agricultural domain that are not framed as Digital Twins. This is not 
surprising, since Digital Twins are building upon existing technologies 
especially for precision farming, internet of things and simulation. 
However, especially more advanced applications, including e.g. pre­
dictive and prescriptive capabilities across the lifecycle, are still in an 
early stage of development. The designed framework was useful to

explicitly describe and analyze how Digital Twins are used in practice. 
As such, it has provided a new perspective on the cases that originally 
focused on the innovative application of Internet of Things technologies 
to farming. It also showed the value of not yet applied Digital Twin 
types, which inspired the use cases about potential redesign scenarios. 
For this reason, we expect that applying the Digital Twin concept, as 
described in our framework, can accelerate the development and 
adoption of Digital Twin solutions for smart farming. However, future 
research is needed to provide evidence for this hypothesis. 
Furthermore, the implementation model of our framework only deals 
with implementing the enabling information technology. We did not 
take into account organisational and behavioural issues, such as the 
impact on supply chain collaboration, data ownership and governance, 
the potential emergence of disruptive business models based on Digital 
Twins, ethical considerations, and so forth. We would like to encourage 
researchers in these disciplines to also study Digital Twins, since these 
non-technical issues might be decisive for the success of Digital Twins. 
Our intended follow-up work is related to the further development of 
the framework. In particular, we plan to elaborate the conceptual 
framework into an information architecture framework, which will 
comprise a consistent set of architectural viewpoints for modelling 
Digital Twin-based software systems (Tekinerdogan and Verdouw, 
2020). This architectural framework will be the basis for developing 
Digital Twin applications that cover the entire life cycle.

Fig. 12. Digital Twins of the growing lettuce and weeds as a presentation in the user terminal of the weeder application.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

17

6.2. Conclusions

This paper has analysed how Digital Twins can advance smart 
farming. More specifically, it addressed the three objectives as 
mentioned in the introduction as follows. 
Firstly, the paper has defined a Digital Twin as “a dynamic repre­
sentation of a real-life object that mirrors its states and behaviour across 
its lifecycle and that can be used to monitor, analyze and simulate 
current and future states of and interventions on these objects, using 
data integration, artificial intelligence and machine learning.” Taking 
into account the role in the life cycle, six distinct Digital Twins are 
identified:

1. Imaginary Digital Twins: conceptual entities that depict and simulate 
reference objects that are not yet connected to objects that physically 
exist in the real-world;  
2. Monitoring Digital Twins: digital representations of the (near) real- 
time state and behaviour of real-life physical objects, including its 
trajectory;  
3. Predictive Digital Twins: digital projections of the future state and 
behaviour of physical objects using predictive analytics and based on 
(near) real-time data of the physical twins;  
4. Prescriptive Digital Twins: smart digital objects that add intelligence 
for recommending corrective and preventive actions on the real-life 
objects;

5. Autonomous Digital Twins: operate autonomously and fully control 
the behaviour of real-life objects without on-site or remote inter­
vention by humans;  
6. Recollection Digital Twins: maintain the complete history of physical 
objects, which no longer exist in real-life.

Secondly, the paper has proposed a conceptual framework for 
designing and implementing Digital Twins in farm management. The 
framework comprises a control model based on a general systems 
approach and an implementation model for Digital Twin systems based 
on the Internet of Things—Architecture (IoT-A), a reference architecture 
for IoT systems. The control model defines the control functions and 
information flows among these functions for control systems based on 
Digital Twins. The implementation model classifies technical function­
alities, from device layer until to application layer, needed to implement 
Digital Twin based systems. 
Finally, the framework is applied to and validated in five smart 
farming use cases of the European IoF2020 project, focussing on arable 
farming, dairy farming, greenhouse horticulture, organic vegetable 
farming and livestock farming. The case-specific control models have 
provided concrete insights in how Digital Twins could enhanced the 
smart farming systems of the use cases. Similarly, the case-specific 
implementation models have been useful to identity improvements of 
the technical architecture.

Fig. 13. Crop growth view on Field Digital Twin in Akkerweb a.k.a. FarmMaps.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

18

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement no. 731884. 
The authors greatly acknowledge the valuable contributions from col­
leagues of the IoF2020 consortium.

References

Lockeretz, W., 2007. Organic Farming: An International History. CAB International, 
Wallingford/ Cambridge, p. 281. 
AIOTI, 2018. High Level Architecture (HLA) Release 4.0. Alliance for Internet of Things 
Innovation. AIOTI WG03 – loT Standardisation. 
Alam, K.M., Saddik, A.E., 2017. C2PS: a Digital Twin architecture reference model for the 
cloud-based cyber-physical systems, 5. IEEE Access, pp. 2050–2062. 
Alves, R.G., Souza, G., Maia, R.F., Tran, A.L.H., Kamienski, C., Soininen, J.-P., Aquino- 
Jr, P.T., Lima, F., 2019. A Digital Twin for Smart Farming. IEEE Global Humanitarian 
Technology Conference Seattle - USA. 
Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., 2010. The internet of things: a survey. Comput. Netw. 
54 (15), 2787–2805. 
Balafoutis, A.T., et al., 2017. Smart farming technologies – Description, taxonomy and 
economic impact. In: Lind, K. (Ed.), Pedersen S. Technology and Economic 
Perspectives. Progress in Precision Agriculture. Springer, Cham, Precision 
Agriculture.  
Bauer, M., Bui, N., De Loof, J., Magerkurth, C., Nettstr¨ater, A., Stefa, J., Walewski, J.W., 
2013. IoT reference model. In: Bassi, A., Bauer, M., Fiedler, M., Kramp, T., van 
Kranenburg, R., Lange, S., Meissner, S. (Eds.), Enabling Things to Talk: Designing IoT 
Solutions with the IoT Architectural Reference Model. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 113–162. 
Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D.K., Mead, M., 1987. The case research Stratey in studies of 
information systems. MIS Q. 11 (3), 369–385.

Boschert, S., Rosen, R., 2016. Digital twin—The simulation aspect. In: Hehenberger, P., 
Bradley, D. (Eds.), Mechatronic Futures: Challenges and Solutions for Mechatronic 
Systems and their Designers. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 59–74. 
Canedo, A., 2016. Industrial iot lifecycle via Digital Twins, Proceedings of the 11th IEEE/ 
ACM/IFIP International Conference on Hardware/Software Codesign and System 
Synthesis, CODES 2016. 
Carrez, F., Bauer, M., Boussard, M., Bui, N., Carrez, F., Jardak, C., Loof, J.D., 
Magerkurth, C., Meissner, S., Nettstr¨ater, A., Olivereau, A., Thoma, M., Walewski, J. 
W., Stefa, J., (UniWue), A.S, 2013. Internet of Things – Architecture IoT-A, 
Deliverable D1.5 – Final architectural reference model for the IoT v3.0. European 
Commission. 
Clements, P., Bachmann, F., Bass, L., Garlan, D., Ivers, J., Little, R., Merson, P., Nord, R., 
Stafford, J., 2010. Documenting Software Architectures: Views and Beyond, second 
ed. Addison-Wesley. 
Dur˜ao, L.F.C.S., Haag, S., Anderl, R., Schützer, K., Zancul, E., 2018. Digital twin 
requirements in the context of industry 4.0. In: Chiabert, P., Bouras, A., No¨el, F., 
Ríos, J. (Eds.), Product Lifecycle Management to Support Industry 4.0. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 204–214. 
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case-study research. Acad. Manag. Rev. 
14 (4), 532–550. 
Fountas, S., Sørensen, C.G., Vatsanidou, A., Liakos, V., Tsiropoulos, Z., Cavalaris, C., 
Canavari, M., Gemtos, T., Blackmore, S., 2013. Farm management information 
systems: current situation and future perspectives. Comput. Electron. Agric. 115, 
40–50. 
Fuller, A., Fan, Z., Day, C., Barlow, C., 2020. Digital twin: enabling technologies, 
challenges and open research. IEEE Access 8, 108952–108971. 
Glaessgen, E., Stargel, D., 2012. The Digital Twin Paradigm for Future NASA and U.S. Air 
Force Vehicles. In: 53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural 
Dynamics and Materials Conference. American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics. 
Grieves, M.W., 2005. Product lifecycle management: the new paradigm for enterprises. 
Int. J. Prod. Dev. 2 (1–2), 71–84. 
Grieves, M., Vickers, J., 2016. Digital twin: Mitigating unpredictable, undesirable 
emergent behaviour in complex systems. In: Kahlen, F.J., Flumerfelt, S., Alves, A. 
(Eds.), Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Complex Systems: New Findings and 
Approaches. Springer, pp. 85–113. 
Grieves, M., Vickers, J., 2017. Digital twin: Mitigating unpredictable, undesirable 
emergent behaviour in complex systems. In: Kahlen, F.-J., Flumerfelt, S., Alves, A. 
(Eds.), Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Complex Systems. Springer International 
Publishing.

Fig. 14. Weed pressure view on Field Digital Twin in 365Farmnet.

C. Verdouw et al.

Agricultural Systems 189 (2021) 103046

19

Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., Palaniswami, M., 2013. Internet of things (IoT): a 
vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 29 
(7), 1645–1660. 
Hagerty, J., 2016. 2017. Planning Guide for Data and Analytics. Gartner. 
Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J., Ram, S., 2004. Design science in information systems 
research. MIS Q. 28 (1), 75–105. 
ITU-T, 2016. Recommendation ITU-T Y. Overview of the Internet of Things. 
Telecommunication Standardization sector of ITU, IoT Reference Model, p. 2060. 
Janssen, S.J.C., et al., 2017. Towards a new generation of agricultural system data, 
models and knowledge products: information and communication technology. Agric. 
Syst. 155, 200–212. 
Jo, S.K., Park, D.H., Park, H., Kim, S.H., 2018. Smart livestock farms using Digital Twin: 
feasibility study. In: 2018 International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), pp. 1461–1463. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ICTC.2018.8539516. 
Jones, D., Snider, C., Nassehi, A., Yon, J., Hicks, B., 2020. Characterising the Digital 
Twin: a systematic literature review. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 29 (A), 36–52. 
Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: a survey. 
Comput. Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90. 
Kampker, A., Stich, V., Jussen, P., Moser, B., Kuntz, J., 2019. Business models for 
industrial smart services - the example of a Digital Twin for a product-service-system 
for potato harvesting. 11th CIRP conference on industrial product-service systems. 
Procedia CIRP 82, 534–540. 
Knibbe, W.J., Ridder, D.D., Ritzer, S., 2019. Kick-off Digital Twins: Let’s find answers 
together accessed.  
Kovacs, Z., Le Goff, J.M., McClatchey, R., 1998. Support for product data from design to 
production. Comput. Integr. Manuf. Syst. 11 (4), 285–290. 
Kritzinger, W., Karner, M., Traar, G., Henjes, J., Sihn, W., 2018. Digital twin in 
manufacturing: a categorical literature review and classification. IFAC-PapersOnLine 
51 (11), 1016–1022. 
de Leeuw, A.C.J., 1997. Organisaties: Management, analyse, ontwerp en verandering; 
een systeemvisie. Van Gorcum, Assen.  
Lepenioti, K., Bousdekis, A., Apostolou, D., Mentzas, G., 2020. Prescriptive analytics: 
literature review and research challenges. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 50, 57–70. 
Linz, A., Hertzberg, J., Roters, J., Ruckelshausen, A., 2019. Digitale Zwillinge als 
Werkzeug für die Entwicklung von Feldrobotern in landwirtschaftlichen Prozessen. 
In: Al, M.A.E. (Ed.), Digitalisierung in kleinstrukturierten Regionen. Gesellschaft für 
Informatik, Bonn, pp. 125–130. 
Maaß, W., Pier, M., Moser, B., 2018. In: Al, K.M.E. (Ed.), Smart Services in der 
Landwirtschaft. Service Engineering. Springer, pp. 167–181. 
March, S.T., Storey, V.C., 2008. Design science in the information systems discipline: an 
introduction to the special issue on design science research. MIS Q. 32 (4), 725–730. 
Marr, B., 2017. What is Digital Twin technology - and why is it so important? Forbes. htt 
ps://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2017/03/06/what-is-digital-twin-techn 
ology-and-why-is-it-so-important/. 
Mike Shafto, C., Conroy, M., Doyle, R., Glaessgen, E., Kemp, C., LeMoigne, J., Wang, L., 
2012. Modeling, Simulation, Information Technology & Processing Roadmap 
Technology Area 11. NASA, Washington, DC, p. 33. 
Mikell, M., Clark, J., 2018. Cheat sheet: What is Digital Twin?, https://www.ibm.com/ 
blogs/internet-of-things/iot-cheat-sheet-digital-twin/. 
Monteiro, J., Barata, J., Veloso, M., Veloso, L., Nunes, J., 2018. Towards sustainable 
Digital Twins for vertical farming. 2018 Thirteenth International Conference on 
Digital Information Management (ICDIM), Berlin, Germany 234–239. 
Park, K.T., Nam, Y.W., Lee, H.S., Im, S.J., Noh, S.D., Son, J.Y., Kim, H., 2019. Design and 
implementation of a Digital Twin application for a connected micro smart factory. 
Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 32 (6), 596–614. 
Philpotts, M., 1996. An introduction to the concepts, benefits and terminology of product 
data management. Industrial Management &amp; Data Systems 96 (4), 11–17. 
Porter, M.E., Heppelmann, J.E., 2014. How Smart Connected Objects Are Transforming 
Competition. Harvard Business Review, November, pp. 65–88. 
Redelinghuys, A., Basson, A., Kruger, K., 2019. A six-layer Digital Twin architecture for a 
manufacturing cell. In: Borangiu, T., Trentesaux, D., Thomas, A., Cavalieri, S. (Eds.), 
Service Orientation in Holonic and Multi-Agent Manufacturing. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 412–423. 
Runeson, P., H¨ost, M., 2008. Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research 
in software engineering. Empir. Softw. Eng. 14 (2), 131.

Saddik, A.E., 2018. Digital twins: the convergence of Multimedia technologies. IEEE 
MultiMedia 25 (2), 87–92. 
Schleich, B., Anwer, N., Mathieu, L., Wartzack, S., 2017. Shaping the Digital Twin for 
design and production engineering. CIRP Ann. 66 (1), 141–144. 
Shaw, K., Fruhlinger, J., 2019. What Is a Digital Twin and why it’s Important to IoT. 
Network World. https://www.networkworld.com/article/3280225/what-is-digit 
al-twin-technology-and-why-it-matters.html. 
Skobelev, P., Laryukhin, V., Simonova, E., Goryanin, O., Yalovenko, V., Yalovenko, O., 
2020. Developing a smart cyber-physical system based on Digital Twins of plants. In: 
Fourth World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, 2020. Security and 
Sustainability (WorldS4), London, United Kingdom, pp. 522–527. 
Sørensen, C.G., Fountas, S., Nash, E., Pesonen, L., Bochtis, D., Pedersen, S.M., Basso, B., 
Blackmore, S.B., 2010. Conceptual model of a future farm management information 
system. Comput. Electron. Agric. 72 (1), 37–47. 
Sreedevi, T.R., Santosh Kumar, M.B., 2020. Digital twin in smart farming: a categorical 
literature review and exploring possibilities in hydroponics. Advanced Computing 
and Communication Technologies for High Performance Applications (ACCTHPA), 
Cochin, India 2020, 120–124. 
Sudarsan, R., Fenves, S.J., Sriram, R.D., Wang, F., 2005. A product information modeling 
framework for product lifecycle management. Comput. Aided Des. 37 (13), 
1399–1411. 
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., Woelffl´e, S., 2010. Vision and Challenges for 
Realising the Internet of Things. European Union, Brussels.  
Int Veld, J., 2002. Analyse van organisatieproblemen. 8th edition ed. In: Stenfert Kroese. 
Tao, F., Cheng, J., Qi, Q., Zhang, M., Zhang, H., Sui, F., 2018. Digital twin-driven product 
design, manufacturing and service with big data. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 94 (9), 
3563–3576. 
Tekinerdogan, B., Verdouw, C., 2020. Systems architecture design pattern Catalog for 
developing Digital Twins. Sensors 20, 5103. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20185103. 
Trienekens, J.H., van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., Verdouw, C.N., 2014. Global food supply 
chains. In: van Alfen, N.K. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Agriculture and Food Systems, 2nd 
edition. Academic Press, pp. 499–517. 
Tzounis, A., Katsoulas, N., Bartzanas, T., Kittas, C., 2017. Internet of things in 
agriculture, recent advances and future challenges. Biosyst. Eng. 164, 31–48. 
Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M., Michahelles, F., 2011. An architectural approach towards 
the future internet of things. In: Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M., Michahelles, F. (Eds.), 
Architecting the Internet of Things. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1–24. 
Van Aken, J.E., 2004. Management research based on the paradigm of the design 
sciences: the quest for field-tested and grounded technological rules. J. Manag. Stud. 
41 (2), 219–246. 
Verdouw, C.N., Kruize, J.W., 2017. Digital Twins in Farm Management : Illustrations 
from the FIWARE Accelerators SmartAgriFood and Fractals. PA17 - the International 
tri-Conference for Precision Agriculture in 2017 Hamilton. 
Verdouw, C.N., Beulens, A.J.M., van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., 2013. Virtualisation of 
floricultural supply chains: a review from an internet of things perspective. Comput. 
Electron. Agric. 99 (1), 160–175. 
Verdouw, C.N., Beulens, A.J.M., Reijers, H.A., Vorst, J.G.A.J.v.d., 2015. A control model 
for object virtualization in supply chain management. Comput. Ind. 68, 116–131. 
Verdouw, C., Wolfert, S., Tekinerdogan, B., 2016a. Internet of things in agriculture. CAB 
Reviews 11 (35), 1–12. 
Verdouw, C.N., Wolfert, J., Beulens, A.J.M., Rialland, A., 2016b. Virtualization of food 
supply chains with the internet of things. J. Food Eng. 176, 128–136. 
Verdouw, C.N., Wolfert, J., Beers, G., Sundmaeker, Harald, Chatzikostas, Grigoris, 2017. 
Fostering business and software ecosystems for large-scale uptake of IoT in food and 
farming, PA17 - the international tri-conference for precision agriculture in 2017. 
Hamilton 1–7. 
Verdouw, C., Sundmaeker, H., Tekinerdogan, B., Conzon, D., Montanaro, T., 2019. 
Architecture framework of IoT-based food and farm systems: a multiple case study. 
Comput. Electron. Agric. 165, 104939. 
Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C., Bogaardt, M.-J., 2017. Big data in smart farming – a 
review. Agric. Syst. 153, 69–80. 
Yin, R.K., 2002. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Inc, 
Newbury Park, Third Edition ed.  
Zhai, Z., Martínez, J.F., Beltran, V., Martínez, N.L., 2020. Decision support systems for 
agriculture 4.0: survey and challenges. Comput. Electron. Agric. 170, 105256.

C. Verdouw et al.