Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

Available online 17 July 2023
2352-5509/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Institution of Chemical Engineers. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Designing diversified crop rotations to advance sustainability: A method 
and an application

Zhengyuan Liang a,b,c,*, Zhan Xu b,c, Jiali Cheng a,b,c, Bowen Ma a,b, Wen-Feng Cong b,**, 
Chaochun Zhang b, Fusuo Zhang b, Wopke van der Werf c, Jeroen C.J. Groot a

a Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands 
b College of Resources and Environmental Science, National Academy of Agriculture Green Development, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China 
c Centre for Crop Systems Analysis, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Editor: Dr. Tomas Balezentis

Keywords: 
Crop diversification 
Pareto optimality 
Profitability 
Human nutrition 
Groundwater depletion 
Greenhouse gas emission

A B S T R A C T

Diversified crop rotations are considered key to solving sustainability issues with modern farming but trade-offs 
often occur among different sustainability objectives. It remains a challenge to design rotations that reach 
compromises across multiple sustainability domains. Here we propose a methodological framework for sys­
tematic design of compromise rotations in terms of a set of sustainability indicators, which for the first time 
combines a rotation generator model (ROTAT), Pareto-based decision-aid tools, and a multi-criteria character­
ization process. We exemplify this framework by exploring promising diversified rotations in terms of 11 sus­
tainability indicators for Quzhou, a typical cereal-growing county in the North China Plain. ROTAT generated 
3011 agronomically feasible rotations but none of them outperformed the currently dominant wheat-maize 
system in all indicators. Then 125 rotations (4 %) were selected as compromise rotations using the Pareto- 
based decision-aid methods. Finally, these compromise rotations were divided into eight clusters representing 
contrasting sustainability patterns, including two profitability-oriented, two nutrition-oriented, and two 
environment-oriented clusters, as well as two clusters that achieved balance across sustainability domains. We 
conclude that no single alternative rotation can solve all conflicting sustainability issues, but compromise al­
ternatives could serve diverse stakeholder demands and provide well-planned options for future agricultural 
landscapes. The crop rotation design method showcased here could also be used in other specialized agricultural 
regions to inform stakeholders and policy-makers about possibilities and trade-offs when improving sustain­
ability of crop production.

1. Introduction

Sustainable crop production is expected to be agronomically pro­
ductive as well as environmentally sound and socio-economically viable 
(Deytieux et al., 2016). Since the Green Revolution, crop production has 
been highly intensified and specialized in many agricultural regions 
around the world (Ickowitz et al., 2019) so that a few calorie-dense 
cereal species dominate farmlands in short rotations with high 
resource inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, and freshwater. In the past 
decades, such agricultural intensification and specialization has 
contributed to satisfying the dietary energy demand of the increasing 
global population but it has also caused negative environmental con­
sequences (Foley et al., 2011; Pellegrini and Fern´andez, 2018), for

instance, water overexploitation and eutrophication (Withers et al., 
2014; Pei et al., 2015), greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Bennetzen 
et al., 2016), and biodiversity loss (Beckmann et al., 2019). Moreover, 
with the pursuit of economic well-being and nutritional security, cereal- 
dominated agriculture offers limited scope for increased farm profit and 
micro-nutrient production (Garibaldi et al., 2017). All of these socio- 
economic, human-nutrition, and eco-environmental sustainability is­
sues need to be addressed with equal importance and urgency. There­
fore, it is crucial to redesign the current intensified and specialized 
cropping systems to advance agricultural sustainability. 
Well-planned crop rotations, particularly the longer and more 
species-diverse ones, are thought to enhance agricultural sustainability 
for specialized cropping regions. Crop rotation is used to break the life

* Correspondence to: Z. Liang, Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands. 
** Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: zhengyuan.liang@wur.nl (Z. Liang), wenfeng.cong@cau.edu.cn (W.-F. Cong).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Sustainable Production and Consumption

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/spc

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.07.018 
Received 4 April 2023; Received in revised form 8 July 2023; Accepted 15 July 2023

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

533

cycle of pests and to improve soil fertility and resource use efficiency 
(Ouda et al., 2018). In modern agriculture, it further helps to handle 
socio-economic, human-nutrition, and environmental challenges. From 
a socio-economic perspective, crop rotation can enhance financial 
profitability by introducing high-value crops (S´anchez et al., 2022), and 
it can attenuate economic risks by combining crops with different 
temporal patterns of price volatility (Rosa-Schleich et al., 2019). From a 
nutritional perspective, diversifying crop rotations with pulses or veg­
etables could increase the production of dietary micronutrients such as 
minerals and vitamins to combat hidden hunger (Dwivedi et al., 2017). 
Diversified crop rotations may also serve to solve resource and envi­
ronmental concerns. Previous studies reported that rotations with water- 
use-efficient species and a decreased cropping intensity could mitigate 
groundwater table decline (Yang et al., 2021). Furthermore, low-input 
rotations, for instance with legumes, reduce the reliance on synthetic 
fertilizers, thereby lowering associated pollution and GHG emission (Liu 
et al., 2022). Additionally, diversified crop rotations could be used as a 
measure to revive farmland biodiversity (Sietz et al., 2022). However, 
when multiple sustainability objectives are concurrently considered, 
trade-offs among objectives are often observed (Kanter et al., 2018), 
which increases the complexity and difficulty of crop rotation planning. 
In this situation, it is preferable to implement diversified crop rotations 
with compromises across sustainability domains while catering to 
various sustainability demands. However, there is a lack of a method to 
systematically design such promising rotations. 
The North China Plain is one of the major specialized and intensified 
crop production regions in China and around the world. Here, the 
intensive wheat-maize double cropping system covers approximately 60 
% of arable land area (Li and Lei, 2021). The widespread cultivation of 
the wheat-maize system has given rise to issues including low farm in­
come, groundwater table decline, high nutrient losses, and pesticide 
risks to human and ecosystem health (Zhang et al., 2016; Wang et al., 
2019; Mu et al., 2022). Moreover, local policies emphasize food and 
nutritional security, GHG emission abatement, and biodiversity con­
servation (MARA, 2022a). Thus, this region serves as an example of the 
arable farming areas that need to address multiple sustainability issues 
resulting from crop specialization while fulfilling diverse sustainability 
demands from agricultural policies and stakeholders. Since the wheat- 
maize system in itself cannot handle all of these challenges, the North 
China Plain presents an ideal case study area to explore diversified ro­
tations that can achieve compromises across multiple sustainability 
objectives. Several previous studies evaluated a few expert-designed 
alternative rotations in the field trials but accounted for only a few 
sustainability indicators, e.g., grain and economic output, water con­
sumption, and carbon emission (Zhao et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2022), and 
overlooked others and potential trade-offs. So far, there have been 
limited efforts on systematic design of rotations with compromises 
across a comprehensive set of sustainability indicators for a given 
region. 
The main objective of this study is to present a novel methodological 
framework for designing promising diversified rotations in terms of 
multiple sustainability attributes, which for the first time combines the 
rotation generator model with the multi-criteria decision-aid and char­
acterization processes. Then, taking Quzhou, a typical cereal-dominated 
agricultural county in the North China Plain, as a case study area, we 
illustrated this framework to 1) design the rotations that represent 
compromises across the entire indicator set, and 2) systematically 
characterize those compromise rotations to understand their potential 
contribution to multi-attribute sustainability. These compromise rota­
tions serve as the basis for local stakeholders’ discussion on enhancing 
farming sustainability. This illustration shows how the presented 
method can be applied in a given area, thus helping to facilitate the 
broader application of this method to design well-performing rotations 
in any other specialized cropping regions that encounter various sus­
tainability challenges.

2. Literature review

2.1. Model-based crop rotation generation and evaluation

Multiple crop rotation generator models have been devised to 
explore alternative rotations. This type of model generates all agro­
nomically feasible rotations based on a list of candidate crops and a set 
of agronomic rules (Dury et al., 2012; Hern´andez-Ochoa et al., 2022). 
The agronomic, economic, and environmental performance of the 
generated rotations can be assessed ex-ante in an empirical way. For 
example, the ROTAT model was used to design rotations that enhance 
farm income and soil organic matter accumulation while lowering soil 
erosion for the vegetable-pasture farms in Uruguay (Dogliotti et al., 
2004, 2014). Bachinger and Zander (2007) developed the ROTOR model 
to generate desirable rotations for organic farming systems in terms of 
operating profits, soil N balance, and weed infestation risks. Reckling 
et al. (2016) proposed a methodological framework for designing and 
evaluating feasible rotations in two European regions, highlighting the 
benefits of legume-inclusive rotations in economic gains, N emission 
mitigation, and phytosanitary effects. Compared with experience-based 
rotation design, the model-based design has three advantages: 1) it uses 
an explicit, systematic, and reproducible procedure, 2) it assesses to 
what extent each sustainability domain may benefit from improved ro­
tations, and 3) it allows the analysis of synergies and trade-offs among 
sustainability domains (Dury et al., 2012; Carof et al., 2013). 
However, rotation generator models are likely to produce large sets 
of feasible alternatives, which may overwhelm stakeholders and 
complicate decision-making, particularly when there are trade-offs 
among assessment indicators. Previous studies with rotation generator 
models often resort to thresholds for certain indicators to identify ro­
tations for adoption (Dogliotti et al., 2004; Bachinger and Zander et al., 
2007), but these threshold values are often arbitrarily defined and may 
not be available for all indicators. Furthermore, trade-offs among some 
indicators are overlooked in these studies. Hence it is crucial to integrate 
rotation generator models with threshold-free multi-criteria decision- 
aid tools to efficiently select well-performing solutions. Nevertheless, 
this integration remains under investigated yet.

2.2. Multi-criteria decision-aid methods on cropping systems

Previous studies on the ex-post assessment of cropping systems have 
often harnessed various quantitative decision-aid tools to choose desir­
able options in terms of multiple sustainability indicators (Deytieux 
et al., 2016; Cicciù et al., 2022). This is because, in most cases, there is 
no single system that performs best in all indicators. Most of these 
studies aggregate multiple elementary indicators into a composite one 
and recommend the crop sequence and/or management strategy with 
the highest overall sustainability score. This aggregation can be 
accomplished by calculating the additive sum or weighted average of 
normalized values of each indicator (Talukder et al., 2018; Ben Abdallah 
et al., 2022) or by quantifying the production efficiency such as data 
envelopment analysis (Pokhrel and Soni, 2017; Yang et al., 2022), eco- 
efficiency (Saber et al., 2021), and environmental footprints (Ankathi 
et al., 2019; Xian et al., 2023). While these methods can identify the 
‘best’ cropping system based on the composite indicator, they may 
conceal the potential trade-offs among elementary indicators during the 
aggregation process. Therefore, the derived single optimal system 
perhaps cannot fit all kinds of sustainability demands. 
Pareto-based decision-aid methods offer promise in addressing the 
aforementioned issue and thus have garnered increasing attention in 
multi-criteria assessment studies regarding agricultural systems (Adel­
hart Toorop et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2022; Ulukan et al., 2022). These 
methods use Pareto-based metrics to select the superior systems in the 
multi-criteria term. For instance, Liang et al. (2022) used the Pareto rank 
metric with seven socio-economic and eco-environmental indicators to 
select Pareto-optimal systems among a group of wheat-maize farmers in

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

534

the North China Plain. In another study, Groot et al. (2010) employed 
the Pareto efficiency metric to design agricultural landscapes that ach­
ieved better compromises across seven objectives related to economics, 
environment, and landscape characters. These methods take into ac­
count trade-offs among indicators during the selection process and ul­
timately maintain a diversity of promising options catering to different 
priorities. However, such metrics have not yet been utilized to support 
the systematic design of crop rotations that reconcile different sustain­
ability domains.

3. Methods

3.1. Methodological framework

The present methodological framework contains three steps to sys­
tematically explore alternative crop rotations that reach compromises 
across multiple sustainability attributes for a given agricultural region 
(Fig. 1).

3.1.1. STEP1: Crop rotation generation & evaluation 
All agronomically feasible rotations were generated by the ROTAT 
model using a list of locally cultivated crops and a set of rotation rules 
(Section 3.3). Simultaneously, ROTAT evaluated each rotation’s sus­
tainability performance based on crop input-output data collected from 
farmers’ survey (Section 3.4).

3.1.2. STEP2: Crop rotation selection 
This step helped to select compromise rotations across all indicators 
from the set of generated rotations (Section 3.5). Based on the indicator 
performance, we identified Pareto-optimal rotations using the Pareto 
ranking procedure and then filtered out Pareto-optimal rotations that 
had unacceptable trade-offs across indicators using Pareto efficiency 
score ordination.

3.1.3. STEP3: Crop rotation characterization 
We finally applied a clustering technique to divide the whole set of 
compromise rotations into several clusters with contrasting sustain­
ability patterns (Section 3.6). The outcome of this step would inform 
stakeholders to choose rotations tailored to given sustainability 
objectives.

3.2. Case study area

We applied the proposed methodological framework to design 
compromise rotations for Quzhou County, Hebei Province, China 
(114◦50′E–115◦13′E, 36◦35′N–36◦57′N, Fig. S1), which is a representa­
tive agricultural county in the North China Plain. Quzhou has a 
temperate continental monsoon climate with four distinct seasons. The 
mean annual temperature is 13.1 ◦C, and the mean annual precipitation 
is 500 mm, 60 % of which occurs from July to August. The soil type is 
calcareous alluvial, with a loamy texture, a pH of 7.5, and a soil organic 
matter content of 1.38 % (Li et al., 2022). Crop production in Quzhou is 
highly specialized and intensified because the winter wheat-summer

Fig. 1. The three-step methodological framework about the systematic exploration of crop rotation set representing compromises across multiple sustainability 
domains. PCA and HCA are the principal component analysis and the hierarchical clustering analysis respectively. Var. means variability. GHG means green­
house gas.

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

535

maize double cropping system dominates local croplands, to which 
farmers apply considerable quantities of fertilizers and water (Liang 
et al., 2022). On the other hand, the pedo-climatic conditions are 
favorable for cultivation of various non-cereal crops such as grain le­
gumes, cotton, stevia, and vegetables. Currently, this county is one of the 
pilot areas of The National Agriculture Green Development Strategy in 
China (MARA, 2022b), emphasizing the agricultural transition towards 
socio-economic, 
human-nutrition, 
and 
eco-environmental 
sustainability.

3.3. Crop rotation generation

We used the ROTAT model to explore alternative crop rotations for 
Quzhou based on ten local major crops (Section 3.3.2) and expert- 
defined agronomic rules (Section 3.3.3).

3.3.1. Model description 
ROTAT is a static and rule-based model that generates agronomically 
feasible rotations at the field scale from a list of candidate crops 
(Dogliotti et al., 2003). The feasibility of generated rotations is ensured 
by obeying a set of pre-defined agronomic rules, which remove unfea­
sible rotations from the full factorial set of candidate crop combinations. 
These rules include crop-timing constraints (e.g., sowing and harvesting 
dates), sequence and frequency constraints (e.g., disallowed crop suc­
cessions and the maximum frequency of each crop or crop group), and 
context-specific constraints (e.g., minimum and maximum rotation 
length). With such explicit rules, ROTAT-aided rotation generation is 
viewed as an objective and transparent process.

3.3.2. Candidate crops and their parameterization 
To determine the list of candidate crops, we conducted a county- 
wide cropping system survey with 525 randomly selected farmers in 
2020 and collected agronomic and input-output information on each 
crop that farmers cultivated (Liang et al., 2022; Supplementary Survey 
Questionnaire). We chose the ten most widely cultivated crop species for 
consideration, whereby the same crop species grown in a different 
growing season was considered a different crop (Table 1; Table S1). 
There were three candidate maize crops and two candidate foxtail millet 
crops, respectively, due to differences in growing season. We parame­
terized these crops in ROTAT based on the agronomic information and 
an inventory of inputs and outputs of each crop, which corresponded to 
the mean or mode values of observations from the survey. We used the 
average input-output data to ensure an accurate representation of the 
baseline performance of each candidate crop and avoid both over- and 
under-estimation. Using the survey information ensured that these 
candidate crops can be broadly grown in the focus region and reflect the

locally proven input-output relations.

3.3.3. Agronomic rules of crop rotation 
By consulting with multiple local agronomists, we defined rules for 
the maximum frequency of crops and crop groups, the minimum period 
between repeated cultivation of crops and crop groups (Table 1), dis­
allowed crop successions (Table S2), and the minimum and maximum 
rotation length. We set the minimum rotation length as one year and the 
maximum as four years because longer rotations are less practical for 
local farmers. The meaning of agronomic rules used in ROTAT is elab­
orated in Table S3. Following the rules would prevent abiotic and biotic 
stresses leading to substantial yield loss and it would also avoid long 
fallow periods between two successive crops for a rotation. Rotational 
constraints in this study were looser than those in other studies 
(Dogliotti et al., 2004; Reckling et al., 2016). For instance, maize and 
wheat were allowed to be planted every year and continuous cultivation 
of cotton was accepted, to reflect existing farmer practices because these 
crops have limited susceptibility to stresses induced by high-frequency 
cropping at current input levels according to local observations.

3.4. Crop rotation evaluation

We chose 11 indicators relevant to local sustainability challenges to 
comprehensively assess the performance of crop rotations by ROTAT. 
These indicators fell into the socio-economic, human-nutrition, and eco- 
environmental domains.

3.4.1. Model assumptions 
The empirical assessment in ROTAT was based on crop input-output 
data representing locally common crop management. We found that 
farmers in Quzhou used high rates of inputs for candidate crops (Table 
S1). In this context of intensive management, we did not consider the 
effects of interactions between successive crops on crop yield in a 
rotation because high use of agricultural inputs, e.g., fertilizers, pesti­
cides, and water, would mask the potential effects of preceding crops on 
nutrient and water turnover, and the prevalence of diseases, pests, and 
weeds (Zhao et al., 2020; MacLaren et al., 2022). For example, the crop 
yield of a certain crop species would be a fixed value independent of the 
preceding crop species in this study. This assumption was agreed upon 
by local agronomists according to their observations.

3.4.2. Sustainability indicators

3.4.2.1. Socio-economic domain

Table 1 
Candidate crops and their basic information and rotation rules.

Crop No. 
Crop name 
Botanical family 
Planting date 
Harvest date 
Max. Freq.a 
Min. Rep.b (yrs)

1 
Winter wheat 
Graminae 
Oct.15 
Jun.1  
1  
0 
2 
Summer maize_normal 
Graminae 
Jun.10 
Oct.1  
1  
0 
3 
Summer maize_late 
Graminae 
Jul.5 
Nov.15  
1  
0 
4 
Spring maize 
Graminae 
May.20 
Oct.1  
1  
0 
5 
Foxtail millet_normalc 
Graminae 
Jun.5 
Oct.1  
0.5  
1.5 
6 
Foxtail millet_latec 
Graminae 
Jul.5 
Nov.15  
0.5  
1.5 
7 
Spring mung beand 
Fabaceae 
Mar.31 
Jul.1  
0.5  
1.5 
8 
Spring peanutd 
Fabaceae 
Apr.15 
Aug.25  
0.5  
1.5 
9 
Cotton 
Malvaceae 
Apr.20 
Oct.28  
1  
0 
10 
Stevia 
Asteraceae 
Apr.15 
Aug.30  
0.5  
1.5 
11 
Chili pepper 
Solanaceae 
Apr.5 
Sep.5  
0.5  
1.5 
12 
Cabbage 
Cruciferae 
Aug.1 
Oct.1  
0.5  
1.5 
13 
Garlic 
Amaryllidaceae 
Oct.5 
Jun.3  
0.5  
1.5

a Max. Freq. means the maximum frequency of the given crop in a rotation. 
b Min. Rep. means the minimum period before repeated cultivation of the given crop in a rotation. 
c Max. Freq. and Min. Rep. for the crop group of foxtail millets are 0.5 and 1.5 years, respectively. 
d Max. Freq. and Min. Rep. for the crop group of legumes are 0.5 and 1.5 years, respectively.

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

536

• Gross margin (GM, USD/ha/yr) was calculated by dividing the sum 
of the gross margin of component crops of a rotation by the rotation 
length measured in years. To reduce the influence of price fluctua­
tion, here we calculated the average gross margin of a rotation across 
15 price settings corresponding to prices of harvested commodities 
and agricultural inputs over 15 years (2006–2020). Accounting for a 
15-year period of price fluctuation aims to capture the full range of 
price fluctuation of agricultural commodities and materials, which 
are known to be highly volatile in Chinese and world markets 
(Headey and Fan, 2008).

GM = 1
15

(∑

k

GMk

)
(1)

GMk =
(∑n

i Ycom,i × PRi,k −Ci,k

)/
RL
/
CPIk
(2)

Where k (=2006, 2007, …, 2020) is the price setting index, i (=1, 2, 
…, n) is the component crop, and n is the total number of component 
crops in a rotation. GMk (USD/ha/yr) is the gross margin of a rotation 
in the price setting k. For crop i, Ycom,i (Mg/ha) is the harvested 
commodity yield, and PRi,k (USD/Mg) is the market price of the 
harvested commodity in year k. Ci,k (USD/ha) indicates the variable 
cost of crop i with input prices in year k, which includes costs of seeds 
or seedlings, plastic films, inorganic fertilizers, animal manures, 
electricity for irrigation, pesticides, and hired agricultural machin­
ery. CPIk is the consumer price index of year k, which was used to 
correct for the inflation across years so that the gross margins of 
different years were standardized to the year 2020. RL (years) de­
notes the rotation length. The price data and CPI across 15 price 
settings were obtained from the local market and statistical yearbook 
(HPBS, 2021). We assume the prices of crop input and output as 
exogenous so these would not vary with the prospective changes in 
crop rotation pattern at the county scale. The economic performance 
of candidate crops is shown in Table S4.

• Gross margin variability (GMV, USD/ha/yr) is the standard devi­

ation of the gross margin of a rotation across 15 price settings (Smith 
et al., 2017):

GMV = SD(GMk)
(3)

• Labor requirement (L, h/ha/yr) is the annual mean labor input 
required by the component crops of a rotation:

L =
∑n

i Li

/
RL
(4)

Where Li (h/ha/yr) represents the labor requirement for crop i 
covering labor consumed for seeding or transplanting, fertilization, 
irrigation, crop protection, pruning, and harvesting.

3.4.2.2. Human-nutrition domain

• Dietary energy yield, zinc yield, and vitamin C yield (Yj, persons/ 
ha/yr). These three indicators reflect how many persons have their 
nutrient requirement met by crop products of a rotation in terms of 
dietary energy, zinc, and vitamin C respectively (DeFries et al., 
2015). These were calculated by dividing the sum of the mass output 
of a given nutrient of all component crops in a rotation by the 
rotation length and associated recommended nutrient intake for a 
reference person:

Yj =
∑n

i Ycom,i × Fj,i

/
RAIj

/
RL
(5)

Where j (=Energy, Zinc, Vitamin C) is the index of the dietary 
nutrient. Fj,i (Gcal or g/Mg) represents the fraction of nutrient j in the 
harvested commodity of crop i. RAIj (Gcal or g/person/yr) means the 
recommended annual intake of nutrient j of a reference person (an 
18-year-old male with a medium intensity of physical work). Fj,i and 
RAIj are listed in Table S5.

3.4.2.3. Eco-environment domain

• Groundwater depletion (GWD, mm/yr) was estimated by empir­

ical equations (Yang et al., 2021):

GWD =
[(∑n

i IRi

)
−D
]/
RL
(6)

Where IRi (mm) denotes the irrigation water amount used for crop i, 
and D (mm) means the deep infiltration during a rotation, calculated 
as:

D = α ×
[(∑n

i IRi

)
+ P × RL
]
(7)

Where P (mm/yr) is the annual precipitation in Quzhou. α represents 
the unitless recharge coefficient calibrated in the study area (0.2).

• Eutrophication potential (EUP, kg PO4 eq./ha/yr) was used to 
quantify the life-cycle environmental influence of a rotation on the 
water bodies (ISO, 2006). The system boundary includes the pre- 
farm period, i.e., the production and transportation of agricultural 
inputs, and the on-farm period, i.e., fertilizer application on the 
arable field. The eutrophication potential of a rotation was calcu­
lated by using the below equation:

EUP =
∑n

i

(
EUPpre,i + EUPon,i

)/
RL
(8)

Where EUPpre,i and EUPon,i (kg PO4 eq./ha) denote the eutrophica­
tion potential of component crop i during the pre- and on-farm 
period, respectively. Detailed calculation of EUPpre,i and EUPon,i is 
specified in the section S1.1–1.2 of the Supplementary Materials.

• Net GHG emission (GHGnet, kg CO2 eq./ha/yr) from the life-cycle 
perspective was used to assess the effects of a rotation on global 
warming (ISO, 2006):

GHGnet =
∑n

i

(
GHGpre,i + GHGon,i −QSOC

)/
RL
(9)

Where GHGpre,i and GHGon,i (Mg CO2 eq./ha) represent GHG emis­
sion during the pre- and on-farm period for crop i, respectively. Their 
calculation was specified in S1.1 and S1.3 of Supplementary Mate­
rials. QSOC (Mg CO2 eq./ha) is the soil carbon stock change over a 
crop rotation cycle, estimated by ROTSOM model, which has been 
locally validated (see S1.3 of Supplementary Materials).

• Pesticide input is the annual mean of the amount of active in­

gredients (AI) of pesticides applied to all component crops in a 
rotation, expressed in kg AI/ha/yr. Pesticides in our study include 
insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides.

• Agrobiodiversity (DIV, unitless). Crop rotational diversity is highly 
associated 
with 
below- 
and 
above-ground 
biodiversity 
in

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

537

agroecosystems (Beillouin et al., 2021) so it can be a proxy indicator 
to quantify agrobiodiversity performance of a rotation. Referring to 
Socolar et al. (2021), we quantified crop rotational diversity by 
taking the geometric mean of species number and length of each 
rotation:

DIV =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
SN × RL
√
(10)

Where SN is the number of crop species with different ecological 
characteristics in a rotation. Wheat and foxtail millet were treated as 
species with the same characteristics as they have similar functional 
traits, e.g., they are both short-statured, deep-rooting, and tillering 
cereal crops.

3.5. Crop rotation selection

Selecting the outperforming rotations among a large set of generated 
rotations in terms of multiple indicators requires multi-attribute deci­
sion-making tools. In this study, we used two Pareto-based metrics to 
identify rotations that reached compromises across the entire indicator 
set.

3.5.1. Pareto rank-based selection 
Pareto ranking is an efficient procedure to identify the better- 
performing individuals from a population of cases. Its major advan­
tage is avoiding the application of weights, so an objective selection 
might be achieved (Adelhart Toorop et al., 2020). Here, we performed 
Pareto ranking using 11 sustainability indicators. In the ranking process, 
rotations were assigned rank “1” (i.e., Pareto-optimality) if none of the 
objectives was improved by another rotation without these other rota­
tions being inferior in at least one of the other objectives (Groot et al., 
2012). This process was conducted by pareto_rank function of “eaf” 
package in R. Here we kept only Pareto-rank-1 rotations for further 
selection.

3.5.2. Pareto efficiency-based selection 
The power of Pareto ranking to narrow down the solution space 
becomes weaker when there are many indicators so that a large pro­
portion of cases from a set would be identified as Pareto-optimal. More 
importantly, Pareto optimal cases include those that stand out in only 
one or a few indicators while performing unacceptably in others (Das, 
1999). Given the above limitations, we also used Pareto efficiency score 
ordination to further select rotations with compromises across indicators 
from the Pareto-optimal set. 
To do so, using the combn and pareto_rank function in R, we deter­
mined the Pareto efficiency score for each Pareto-optimal rotation ac­
cording to the following principle: When the size of the whole indicator 
set is n, the Pareto efficiency score of a given case would be k (1 ≤k ≤n) 
if this case was Pareto-optimal for any of all possible k-element subsets 
of n indicators (Das, 1999). The lower the Pareto efficiency score is, the 
more compromise a rotation achieves across the indicator set (Fig. 2). 
We classified a rotation as a compromise rotation when its Pareto effi­
ciency score was not higher than that of wheat-maize; that is: such 
compromise rotations had a trade-off across indicators that was at most 
as strong as that of the currently dominant wheat-maize system. We did 
not select only rotations with the lowest Pareto efficiency score, the 
number of which tends to be limited, because we deemed it necessary to 
maintain a diversity of solutions to meet different sustainability 
demands.

3.6. Crop rotation characterization

Systematically characterizing the sustainability profiles of the 
compromise rotations allows stakeholders to choose rotations that fit 
their sustainability demands. However, it can be expected that the 
performance of these promising rotations was heterogeneous. Therefore, 
we performed a multivariate clustering (Groot and Yang, 2022) to 
partition all compromise rotations into several clusters with contrasting 
sustainability patterns.

Fig. 2. Conceptual diagram of the determination of 
Pareto efficiency score for rotations. G1, G2, and G3 
indicate three sustainability goals that are maximized. 
Circles filled with red, yellow, blue, purple, and green 
are Pareto-optimal rotations with respect to three 
goals (G1, G2, and G3), while grey circles are non- 
Pareto-optimal rotations, i.e., inferior rotations. Out 
of the five Pareto-optimal cases, only the green case is 
Pareto-optimal for all two-indicator subsets of G1, G2, 
and G3, which is therefore assigned a Pareto effi­
ciency score of two, whereas the red, yellow, blue, 
and purple circles are assigned a Pareto efficiency 
score of three. The rotation with the lower Pareto 
efficiency score (2; green point) represents a better 
compromise across the entire indicator set.

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

538

This clustering method entailed a principal component analysis 
(PCA) and a hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA). With 11 sustain­
ability indicators being response variables, we first conducted PCA using 
the dudi-pca function of the “ade4” R package to obtain principal com­
ponents. Subsequently, we used HCA to classify all compromise rota­
tions into different clusters in terms of principal components by using 
function hclus and cutree in R. The number of clusters was decided ac­
cording to the bend position of the elbow plot (Kassambara, 2017). 
These rotation clusters served different patterns of sustainability 
performance. 
Finally, we characterized the crop composition of compromise ro­
tations in terms of the frequency (Freq) of four crop subsets, including 
cereals (wheat, maize, foxtail millet), legumes (peanut and mung bean), 
fiber crops (cotton) and cash crops (stevia, cabbage, chili pepper, and 
garlic). This frequency metric can be used to analyze the relations be­
tween crop choice and sustainability attributes of a rotation, which was 
calculated as follows:

Freq = Ns/RL
(11)

Where s is the index for crop subsets and Ns is the number of times crops 
from subset s were included in a rotation.

4. Results

4.1. Generated alternative rotations versus the currently dominant system

ROTAT generated 3011 feasible rotations with a length of 1–4 years 
for Quzhou, including the locally common wheat-maize double cropping 
system. Alternative rotations showed a wide range of performance in all 
indicators but none of them outperformed the wheat-maize system in all 
11 indicators (Table 2). That is because the wheat-maize system had the 
highest dietary energy and zinc output. Furthermore, it had the fourth 
lowest labor requirement and a gross margin variability that was 48 % 
lower than the mean of alternatives. However, compared with the 
wheat-maize system, many alternative rotations attained large im­
provements in gross margin, vitamin C yield, and eco-environmental

indicators such as groundwater depletion, eutrophication potential, 
net GHG emission, and agrobiodiversity.

4.2. Pareto-optimal rotations and relationships among indicators

Among the 3011 generated rotations, 1298 rotations (43 %) were 
Pareto-optimal. 
An indicator biplot matrix of the Pareto-optimal set shows relation­
ships among sustainability indicators (Fig. 3). Within the socio- 
economic domain, there were strong trade-offs between gross margin 
and gross margin variability or labor requirement. As for the human 
nutrition domain, dietary energy and zinc yield correlated positively, 
whereas vitamin C yield was highest at the intermediate levels of energy 
and zinc yield. In general, the eco-environmental indicators were posi­
tively associated with one another, while biodiversity tended to be 
highest for rotations with intermediate performance for other indicators. 
Pesticide use had a three-modal distribution within the set of indicators. 
This distribution was related to the cultivation frequency of chili pepper, 
the most pesticide-intensive crop among the candidate crops (Table S1). 
When analyzing relationships among indicators in different sus­
tainability domains, trade-offs mainly occurred in these pairs: gross 
margin versus dietary energy yield, gross margin versus environmental 
indicators, and nutritional yield versus environmental indicators. On the 
other hand, synergies existed between gross margin and vitamin C yield, 
and between gross margin variability or labor requirement and most 
environmental indicators.

4.3. Pareto efficiency-based selection: compromise rotations

Within the Pareto-optimal set of 1298 rotations, 1173 had higher 
Pareto efficiency score (10 or 11) than the currently dominant wheat- 
maize double cropping system which has a Pareto efficiency score of 9 
(Table S6). The remaining 125 rotations, having a score of 9 or less, were 
selected as compromise rotations. This subset excluded extremely 
underperforming rotations in terms of gross margin variability, labor 
use, energy and zinc yield, and all eco-environmental indicators (Fig. 3). 
These compromise rotations were distributed widely across the indica­
tor space (Fig. 3), indicating a great heterogeneity in indicator 
performance. 
There were 109 rotations with a Pareto efficiency score of 9, equal to 
wheat-maize, but only sixteen with a Pareto efficiency score lower than 
9 (Table S6): fourteen rotations with Pareto efficiency score of 8 and two 
rotations with Pareto efficiency score of 7. These sixteen alternatives 
had high frequencies of cereals (wheat, maize, and foxtail millet), le­
gumes (peanut and mung bean), and garlic. The lowest score of 7 was 
attained by two four-year rotations: (Spring maize)-(Spring peanut)- 
(Spring maize)-(Spring mung bean)-(Foxtail millet_late) and (Spring 
maize)-(Spring peanut)-(Spring maize)-(Garlic)-(Foxtail millet_normal). 
While these rotations are well-performing in many respects, they did not 
meet all sustainability needs. For instance, compared with the wheat- 
maize system, these rotations resulted in 22–67 % lower groundwater 
depletion, eutrophication potential, GHG emission, and pesticide input 
but at the cost of 28 % lower gross margin for the former one, and a three 
times higher labor use for the latter one, and half dietary energy yield for 
both (Table S7).

4.4. Characterization of compromise rotations

Based on the PCA and HCA with 11 sustainability indicators, all 125 
compromise rotations were divided into eight clusters (C1-C8; Fig. 4, 
Fig. S2). 
C1 and C2 were characterized by a high frequency of cash crops. 
Rotations in these clusters delivered the greatest mean gross margin 
(4706–4748 USD/ha/yr) but resulted in the highest economic instability 
(981 USD/ha/yr) and labor requirement (1568 h/ha/yr), respectively. 
These profitable clusters generated relatively high environmental costs,

Table 2 
Indicator performance of the wheat-maize system and alternative rotations (n =
3010), and the number of rotations outperforming the wheat-maize system.

Indicator 
Unit 
Wheat- 
maize 
system

Alternative 
rotationsa

Number of 
outperformersb

Gross margin 
USD/ha/ 
yr 
2654 
4446 
(1641–8944) 
2871

Gross margin 
variability 
USD/ha/ 
yr 
392 
755 
(207–1677) 
174

Labor 
requirement 
h/ha/yr 
247 
1389 
(189–3415) 
3

Dietary energy 
yield 
persons/ 
ha/yr 
57 
28 (0–56) 
0

Zinc yield 
persons/ 
ha/yr 
69 
36 (0–69) 
0

Vitamin C yield 
persons/ 
ha/yr 
0 
184 (0–725) 
2649

Groundwater 
depletion 
mm/yr 
284 
223 (44–364) 
2583

Eutrophication 
potential 
kg PO4 
eq./ha/yr 
28.9 
32.2 
(12.3–60.0) 
1012

Net GHG 
emission 
Mg CO2 
eq./ha/yr 
6.64 
7.52 
(3.19–12.82) 
850

Pesticide input 
kg AI/ha/ 
yr 
6.64 
9.77 
(3.21–23.94) 
895

Agrobiodiversity 
unitless 
1.41 
4.16 
(1.00–4.90) 
3009

a Data were shown as “mean (minimum-maximum)” across all alternative 
rotations.

b Outperformers means the rotations that outperformed wheat-maize double 
cropping in the focus indicator.

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

539

including groundwater depletion, eutrophication potential, and net 
GHG emission, while they supplied more dietary macro- and micro- 
nutrients and facilitated higher agrobiodiversity on average. Further­
more, C2 had the highest pesticide input. 
C3 (which included the wheat-maize system) and C4 were clusters of 
cereal-dominated rotations. They were the most productive sets of ro­
tations in terms of energy yield (49 persons/ha/yr) and zinc output (58 
persons/ha/yr) across all clusters. On average, C3 had a low gross 
margin but with a low economic risk and labor use as well, whereas C4 
obtained intermediate gross margin but at the cost of a higher economic

risk and labor use. Both C3 and C4 caused high groundwater depletion. 
The eutrophication potential and GHG emission of C4 were on average 
the third highest while those of C3 were intermediate among all clusters. 
C3 performed poorly in terms of agrobiodiversity (2.71). 
Clusters C5 and C6 both had a high cultivation frequency of legumes 
and negligible vegetable production. C5 showed the highest frequency 
of cotton while C6 planted cereals instead of cotton. These two clusters 
had superior environmental performance. C5 resulted in the lowest 
groundwater depletion (65 mm/yr), eutrophication potential (13.0 kg 
PO4 eq./ha/yr), and GHG emission (3.46 Mg CO2 eq./ha/yr) while

Fig. 3. Indicator biplot matrix for the entire set of Pareto-optimal rotations divided into two groups with Pareto efficiency score ≤9 (blue dots) and > 9 (grey dots). 
Rotations with Pareto efficiency score ≤9 were defined as compromise rotations. The yellow square denotes the currently dominant system (the wheat-maize 
system), for which Pareto efficiency score is 9. Margin, gross margin (USD/ha/yr); GMV, gross margin variability (USD/ha/yr); DE, dietary energy yield; Zn, zinc 
yield; VC, vitamin C yield (above three expressed in persons/ha/yr); GWD, groundwater depletion (mm/yr); Pesti, pesticide input (kg AI/ha/yr); EUP, eutrophication 
potential (kg PO4 eq./ha/yr); GHGn, net greenhouse gas emission (Mg CO2 eq./ha/yr); DIV, agrobiodiversity (unitless).

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

540

markedly sacrificing economic and nutritional outputs. C6 was charac­
terized by the second lowest groundwater depletion, eutrophication 
pollution, and GHG emission, as well as the third lowest pesticide use, 
but with the lowest gross margin. 
C7 and C8 had high shares of legumes and intermediate shares of 
cereals and high-input cash crops. In contrast to the abovementioned 
clusters, these two clusters reached balanced performance across the 
indicator set. That means they performed at an intermediate level in 
nearly all indicators.

5. Discussion

In this study, we presented a methodological framework for sys­
tematic design of diversified crop rotations featuring compromises 
across multiple competing sustainability attributes. This is the first 
rotation design framework that combines a rotation generator model 
with Pareto-based decision-aid methods, to efficiently suggest options to 
advance sustainability. We illustrated this framework with data from a 
highly specialized and intensified cropping region (Quzhou county in 
the North China Plain) to explore promising rotations in terms of 11 
sustainability indicators. Although there was no one-size-fits-all rotation 
that outperformed the locally dominant wheat-maize system for all in­
dicators concurrently, this analysis identified a set of compromise ro­
tations, i.e., rotations with trade-offs across indicators not stronger than 
that of the wheat-maize system. These compromise rotations also rep­
resented contrasting sustainability profiles, with different rotations 
satisfying to different extents objectives related to economic-value cre­
ation, human nutrition, and environmental conservation, or all of these 
in a balanced manner, depending on the crop species composition of the 
rotation. The diversity of compromise rotations could serve to meet 
diverse sustainability demands for stakeholders and complement the 
locally dominant cropping system in the future.

5.1. The future role and implementation of compromise rotations in 
specialized cropping regions

Intensified cereal-based systems in short crop rotations are wide­
spread in many agricultural regions globally such as the North China 
Plain, the Indo-Gangetic Plain, and the Great Plain and Midwest of the 
US. Such systems are widely cultivated to maximize staple grain pro­
duction with the supportive institutions and policies. For example, sta­
ple cereal production in China is promoted by policy instruments for the 
minimum procurement price, and grain and input subsidies (Kimura 
et al., 2019; Song et al., 2021; OECD, 2022), which provide a safety net 
for farmers. With the extensive cultivation of cereals, social institutions 
are increasingly prone to grain production accordingly. For instance, 
many agricultural markets and most technological innovations target 
staple cereals. Hence there is a socio-technical lock-in of cereal crop 
specialization (Meynard et al., 2018). However, cereal monoculture has 
rendered 
lots 
of 
socio-economic, 
human-nutrition, 
and 
eco- 
environmental issues so a cropping system redesign towards diversifi­
cation is deemed necessary to enhance farming sustainability in these 
specialized cropping regions (Davis et al., 2019; Hunt et al., 2019; Yang 
et al., 2021). In China, the government has partially relaxed the food 
self-sufficiency policy (Ito and Li, 2023) and enacted various policies on 
Agriculture Green Development to foster multi-attribute agricultural 
sustainability (MARA, 2022a, 2022b) with a focus on the establishment 
of innovative cropping systems, which offer great opportunities for 
future application of diversified crop rotations. 
As trade-offs among competing objectives are normally inevitable 
(Hegwood et al., 2022), promising cropping systems should reach 
compromises across sustainability domains. In our case study, with the 
help of the Pareto efficiency-based selection, our compromise rotations 
did not include extreme alternatives included in the Pareto-optimal set, 
for example, the most profitable system [a two-year rotation of (cab­
bage)-(chili pepper)-(garlic)] and the most groundwater-friendly system

Fig. 4. Sustainability performance (a-k) and crop subset composition (l) of clusters (C1-C8) of compromise rotations. The yellow rhombus indicates the average value 
of a cluster, and the dashed line indicates the performance of the wheat-maize system. EUP means eutrophication potential and GHGn means net greenhouse gas 
emission. Data for planting frequency of crop subsets are the mean values of rotations in a cluster. “HI cash crops” means high-input cash crops. For members of each 
crop subset, see Section 3.6 in the main text.

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

541

(continuous cotton cropping), because these alternatives strongly 
sacrificed other sustainability indicators. We also found that compro­
mise rotations comprised mainly wheat and maize supplemented with 
other candidate species, rather than rotations of pure vegetables or le­
gumes. This implies that shifting from the wheat-maize system to these 
compromise rotations would not be a radical process, thus conducive to 
their acceptability to practitioners from the technical perspective. 
Compromise rotations could be chosen and implemented tailored to 
the production contexts and stakeholders’ interests because these rota­
tions could deliver contrasting patterns of sustainability services ac­
cording to multi-criteria characterization (Fig. 4; Fig. 5). Taking the 
North China Plain as an example, rotations from the profitability- 
oriented cluster (C1&C2) could be recommended to villages where 
boosting farmers’ income is prioritized. These profitable rotations could 
act as a measure in policies on rural poverty reduction while policy­
makers could provide accompanying measures, e.g., agricultural insur­
ance, to hedge against market risks of vegetables (Feliciano, 2019). 
Stevia is now promoted in Quzhou to increase farm profits but is not 
included in any compromise rotation because it does not produce nu­
trients for human diets and has a high environmental burden, suggesting 
that non-edible and high-input cash crops might be not a reasonable 
choice when multiple objectives are considered. Nutrition-oriented ro­
tations (C3&C4) could be practiced in villages that still shoulder the 
responsibility for food provisioning allocated by the Chinese govern­
ment. Compared with wheat-maize, most rotations from C3 could 
reduce the environmental burden while those from C4 could enhance 
gross margin, at the cost of calorie production to some degree for both. 
The final decision can be made based on local stakeholders’ preferences. 
The environmentally sound rotations can play a role in ecologically 
fragile villages with, for instance, severe groundwater overdrafts or 
nutrient pollution. Some of these rotations had a comparable or higher 
gross margin than wheat-maize owing to the inclusion of peanut and 
cotton, while others were less profitable thus requiring subsidies to 
incentive implementation. Rotations from balanced clusters are suitable

for areas without overriding priorities for specific sustainability do­
mains. Relative to wheat-maize, these systems can improve gross margin 
and environmental performance with intermedium dietary nutrient 
supply by rotating cereals, legumes, and garlic. This result indicates that 
the balanced planting frequency of crops from different functional 
groups could balance trade-offs among conflicting sustainability in­
dicators. Furthermore, as nearly all alternative rotations require more 
labor than wheat-maize, machinery for non-cereal crops could be 
devised and promoted to substantially reduce labor use thus facilitating 
the application of these compromise rotations. Taken together, through 
rational crop species arrangement, compromise rotations could act as a 
range of well-planned options to address different sustainability con­
cerns in specialized cropping regions (Fig. 5; Table S8). 
As mentioned before, trade-offs among indicators exist within clus­
ters of rotations that had the same sustainability orientation, although 
softer than those among rotations with contrasting orientations. 
Therefore, stakeholder discussion might be needed to make a final 
choice for the rotations most suitable for adoption. The arable farming 
system involves several stakeholders, including crop farmers, govern­
mental departments, and the public, with differing preferences for 
agricultural sustainability. Farmers primarily seek to maximize profits 
while minimizing market risks and labor inputs. On the other hand, the 
government and the public focus on securing food supply and reducing 
agriculture-induced resource and environmental costs. The set of 
compromise rotations could serve as a basis for evaluation and discus­
sion among stakeholders, which would facilitate identifying the “middle 
ground” of competing interests while offering prioritized options for 
specific stakeholders’ interests. Furthermore, as the compromise rota­
tions were identified by inter-comparing all possible rotations, it is 
crucial to check and judge the specific quantities of each indicator of 
rotations during the stakeholders’ decision-making process, allowing for 
better understanding of their potential benefits and drawbacks before 
implementation. 
Improved management practices for candidate crops in crop

Fig. 5. The examples of compromise rotations (a) and comparison of their sustainability performance (b). Each donut plot represents a rotation, in which the length 
of each section indicates the proportion of crop growth and land fallowing period in the length of one rotation cycle. In subplot (b), values of each indicator were 
rescaled to 0–1 using Min-Max normalization. “0” and “1” correspond to the worst and best performance of each indicator across all generated rotations respectively, 
i.e., all indicators have the same optimization direction. Margin, gross margin; GMV, gross margin variability; DE, dietary energy yield; Zn, zinc yield; VC, vitamin C 
yield; GWD, groundwater depletion; Pesti, pesticide input; EUP, eutrophication potential; GHGn, net greenhouse gas emission; DIV, agrobiodiversity. Specific in­
dicator values of each example rotation were listed in Table S8.

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

542

rotations could further ameliorate agricultural sustainability in the 
future. As we based our input-output relations on survey data, the 
farmer management for the candidate crops in this study may not be 
agronomically optimal. Further improvements might reduce yield gaps 
and resource inputs (Table S1; Table S9). If those crops are managed 
with efficient cultivation practices such as optimized nutrient and water 
management, the crop performance would accordingly improve, and, 
more importantly, crop interactions between consecutive crops in a 
rotation could perhaps function to additionally enhance system perfor­
mance (Lambers and Cong, 2022), for instance, increased grain yield of 
cereals when preceded by N-fixing legumes in the rotation (Zhao et al., 
2022; Xia et al., 2023).

5.2. Improved method for model-aided multi-objective crop rotation 
design

Model-aided rotation planning is a powerful approach in the field of 
multi-objective farming system redesign. Several studies used rule-based 
rotation generator models with multi-indicator assessment to offer a 
large set of all agronomically feasible alternative rotations and their 
performance but normally ended up analyzing the co-benefits or trade- 
offs among indicators or selecting preferred alternatives based on sub­
jectively defined threshold values for some of the indicators (Dogliotti 
et al., 2004; Bachinger and Zander, 2007; Reckling et al., 2016). Here, 
our methodological framework introduces the Pareto-based multi- 
criteria decision-aid tools to select promising alternatives, where the 
performance features compromises in trade-off frontiers across objec­
tives and is subsequently characterized by a clustering technique. Such 
clustering results could help stakeholders to choose alternatives fitting 
their demands in the follow-up decision-making process. Our framework 
integrates the advantages of the rotation generator and Pareto-based 
trade-off analysis, which can design rotations that are agronomically 
viable and better performing in terms of multiple attributes. 
Our methodological framework suggests a set of promising rotations 
using Pareto-based metrics, rather than a single ‘optimal’ rotation using 
other decision-making methods such as aggregated sustainability in­
dicators or data envelopment analysis (Cicciù et al., 2022). We think the 
method of rotation design should not aim to recommend a single solu­
tion for broader adoption but it should offer a range of solutions for 
different sustainability demands for a given agricultural region. The first 
reason is, as mentioned in Section 5.1, that trade-offs among sustain­
ability indicators are normally unavoidable across solution space when a 
large number of indicators are considered (Hegwood et al., 2022). This 
makes it impossible to identify a solution that excels in all respects. It 
would be more practical to give a set of promising alternatives with an 
appropriate size to inform stakeholders’ decision-making based on their 
demands and preference. The other reason why a range of solutions 
should be offered is that promoting a single rotation across a region is 
not ecologically desirable. It can be expected that a wide application of a 
certain rotation, even if it is highly temporally diversified, would lead to 
homogenous agricultural landscapes, which could adversely affect the 
delivery of multiple ecosystem services (Sirami et al., 2019). Conversely, 
adoption of a range of alternative rotations within a region could help to 
construct more diversified landscapes. 
The presented framework can be applied in other intensified and 
specialized cropping regions to advance agricultural sustainability with 
some adaptations. Firstly, sustainability indicators should be adjusted to 
align with region-specific objectives. For example, energy depletion for 
fossil fuel-scarce areas (Nemecek et al., 2015), soil acidification rate for 
acid-soil areas (Zhu et al., 2018), and soil erosion for the hilly areas 
(Dogliotti et al., 2004). The human-nutrition indicators can also be 
determined according to specific nutrient deficiency issues, e.g., sele­
nium, iron, and vitamin A. Next, the candidate crop list and related 
input-output data for indicator assessment can be compiled based on 
local farmers’ survey, statistical materials, or expert knowledge. Using a 
survey dataset provides updated and detailed information on crop

production patterns within a given region and researchers can gain 
many insights on cropping system innovation during the interview with 
farmers. Furthermore, the rotation rules can be formulated with 
agronomists, advisors, or experienced farmers in the study region or 
extracted from relevant literature. By incorporating these adaptations, 
researchers or practitioners can effectively apply the framework to 
design promising diversified rotations elsewhere.

5.3. Limitation and outlook

The limitation of this study mainly lies in the uncertainty of the ex- 
ante sustainability assessment of generated rotations. First, the candi­
date crop dataset was compiled based on the farmer survey in 2020, so 
we did not consider the interannual variations in crop input and output, 
which might be affected by different weather conditions. Although 
having only one-year data, we found the temperature and precipitation 
in the year 2020 in Quzhou were close to average conditions so our 
dataset represents the baseline of local crop production. In the future, 
crop input and output data from several years could be collected and 
analyzed to increase the representativeness of the results. Second, the 
environmental impact assessment of candidate crops was based on 
numerous empirical models rather than field measurements. To make 
our results closer to reality, we chose widely-used models and used crop 
and environmental parameters that match the local situation (Supple­
mentary Materials S1.1–1.3). In the economic assessment we took prices 
to be exogenous, which is defensible as the agricultural markets operate 
on a larger scale than the studied county while Quzhou is relatively well 
connected to those markets. However, when applying this methodo­
logical framework in regions with more localized markets, endogeneity 
of price variables may arise, particularly in relation to some region- 
specific crops or locally scarce agricultural inputs. 
Future efforts could focus on field testing, regional planning, and 
implementing new scenarios. Some of the compromise rotations could 
be tested in the field experimental station or on farm. The rotations for 
testing are supposed to be from different rotation clusters, for example, 
those in Fig. 5. This would allow us to compare outcomes between the 
ex-ante and ex-post assessment, and help to adjust the parameters used in 
the design approach and gain more insight in system functioning (Cong 
et al., 2021). Next, we could investigate how those promising alternative 
rotations would be spatially allocated to cropping landscape within the 
study region to pursue agricultural sustainability at the regional scale. 
The allocation needs to consider the potential biophysical and socio- 
economic barriers for adoption of those alternatives in a given land 
parcel and could account for interactions with surrounding fields and 
other landscape elements. Lastly, we could also explore alternative ro­
tations towards better farming sustainability with new scenarios con­
cerning, for instance, improvement in management practices and 
inclusion of locally underutilized crop species.

6. Conclusion

This study presented a new crop rotation design framework aiming 
to enhance multi-attribute sustainability for intensified and specialized 
cropping regions. The framework consists of a rotation generator model, 
Pareto-based decision-aid tools, and a multi-criteria characterization 
process, able to offer a set of diversified rotations with compromises 
across multiple sustainability attributes. We illustrated this framework 
with data from Quzhou county in the North China Plain, a region with 
double cropping of cereals as the dominant land use, and successfully 
proposed a manageable size of compromise rotations in the end. The 
currently dominant cropping system, wheat-maize double cropping, 
contributed most to dietary energy provisioning while the compromise 
alternatives improved gross margin, vitamin C production, and a range 
of environmental indicators. The resulting rotations were grouped into 
multiple clusters with contrasting sustainability profiles fitting corre­
sponding production contexts and stakeholders’ preferences. Thus, with

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

543

this framework, we provided a proper diversity of solutions that might 
become important elements of the future farming landscape to support 
stakeholders’ decision-making. With adaptations to contrasting condi­
tions, this rotation design framework could also be applied in other 
specialized and intensified agricultural areas to combat sustainability 
challenges. 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.07.018.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment

We thank local agronomists who participated in the discussion of 
agronomic rules. We acknowledge Dr. Nico Heerink for his suggestions 
on the socio-economic aspects of this manuscript. This research was 
financed through the China Scholarship Council (No.201913043), 
Hainan University, and the Program of Advanced Discipline Construc­
tion in Beijing (Agriculture Green Development).

References

Adelhart Toorop, R., Ceccarelli, V., Bijarniya, D., Jat, M.L., Jat, R.K., Lopez-Ridaura, S., 
Groot, J.C.J., 2020. Using a positive deviance approach to inform farming systems 
redesign: A case study from Bihar, India. Agric. Syst. 185, 102942 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102942. 
Ankathi, S.K., Long, D.S., Gollany, H.T., Das, P., Shonnard, D., 2019. Life cycle 
assessment of oilseed crops produced in rotation with dryland cereals in the inland 
Pacific Northwest. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 24, 627–641. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11367-018-1488-y. 
Bachinger, J., Zander, P., 2007. ROTOR, a tool for generating and evaluating crop 
rotations for organic farming systems. Eur. J. Agron. 26, 130–143. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.eja.2006.09.002. 
Beckmann, M., Gerstner, K., Akin-Fajiye, M., Ceaușu, S., Kambach, S., Kinlock, N.L., 
Phillips, H.R.P., Verhagen, W., Gurevitch, J., Klotz, S., Newbold, T., Verburg, P.H., 
Winter, M., Seppelt, R., 2019. Conventional land-use intensification reduces species 
richness and increases production: A global meta-analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol. 25, 
1941–1956. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14606. 
Beillouin, D., Ben-Ari, T., Mal´ezieux, E., Seufert, V., Makowski, D., 2021. Positive but 
variable effects of crop diversification on biodiversity and ecosystem services. Glob. 
Chang. Biol. 27, 4697–4710. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15747. 
Ben Abdallah, S., Parra-L´opez, C., Elfkih, S., Su´arez-Rey, E.M., Romero-G´amez, M., 2022. 
Sustainability assessment of traditional, intensive and highly-intensive olive growing 
systems in Tunisia by integrating Life Cycle and Multicriteria Decision analyses. 
Sustain. Prod. Consum. 33, 73–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2022.06.022. 
Bennetzen, E.H., Smith, P., Porter, J.R., 2016. Agricultural production and greenhouse 
gas emissions from world regions—The major trends over 40 years. Glob. Environ. 
Chang. 37, 43–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.12.004. 
Carof, M., Colomb, B., Aveline, A., 2013. A guide for choosing the most appropriate 
method for multi-criteria assessment of agricultural systems according to decision- 
makers’ expectations. Agric. Syst. 115, 51–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2012.09.011. 
Cicciù, B., Schramm, F., Schramm, V.B., 2022. Multi-criteria decision making/aid 
methods for assessing agricultural sustainability: A literature review. Environ. Sci. 
Pol. 138, 85–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2022.09.020. 
Cong, W.-F., Zhang, C., Li, C., Wang, G., Zhang, F., 2021. Designing diversified cropping 
systems in China: Theory, approaches and implementation. Front. Agric. Sci. Eng. 8 
(3), 362–372. https://doi.org/10.15302/J-FASE-2021392. 
Das, I., 1999. A preference ordering among various Pareto optimal alternatives. Struct. 
Optim. 18, 30–35. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01210689. 
Davis, K.F., Chhatre, A., Rao, N.D., Singh, D., Ghosh-Jerath, S., Mridul, A., Poblete- 
Cazenave, M., Pradhan, N., DeFries, R., 2019. Assessing the sustainability of post- 
Green Revolution cereals in India. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 25034–25041. https:// 
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1910935116. 
DeFries, R., Fanzo, J., Remans, R., Palm, C., Wood, S., Anderman, T.L., 2015. Metrics for 
land-scarce agriculture. Science 349, 238–240. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 
aaa5766. 
Deytieux, V., Munier-Jolain, N., Caneill, J., 2016. Assessing the sustainability of cropping 
systems in single- and multi-site studies. A review of methods. Eur. J. Agron. 72, 
107–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.10.005. 
Dogliotti, S., Rossing, W.A.H., van Ittersum, M.K., 2003. ROTAT, a tool for systematically 
generating crop rotations. Eur. J. Agron. 19, 239–250. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S1161-0301(02)00047-3.

Dogliotti, S., Rossing, W.A.H., van Ittersum, M.K., 2004. Systematic design and 
evaluation of crop rotations enhancing soil conservation, soil fertility and farm 
income: a case study for vegetable farms in South Uruguay. Agric. Syst. 80, 277–302. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2003.08.001. 
Dogliotti, S., García, M.C., Peluffo, S., Dieste, J.P., Pedemonte, A.J., Bacigalupe, G.F., 
Scarlato, M., Alliaume, F., Alvarez, J., Chiappe, M., Rossing, W.A.H., 2014. Co- 
innovation of family farm systems: A systems approach to sustainable agriculture. 
Agric. Syst. 126, 76–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2013.02.009. 
Dury, J., Schaller, N., Garcia, F., Reynaud, A., Bergez, J.E., 2012. Models to support 
cropping plan and crop rotation decisions. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 32, 
567–580. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-011-0037-x. 
Dwivedi, S.L., Lammerts van Bueren, E.T., Ceccarelli, S., Grando, S., Upadhyaya, H.D., 
Ortiz, R., 2017. Diversifying food systems in the pursuit of sustainable food 
production and healthy diets. Trends Plant Sci. 22, 842–856. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.tplants.2017.06.011. 
Feliciano, D., 2019. A review on the contribution of crop diversification to Sustainable 
Development Goal 1 “No poverty” in different world regions. Sustain. Dev. 27, 
795–808. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.1923. 
Foley, J.A., Ramankutty, N., Brauman, K.A., Cassidy, E.S., Gerber, J.S., Johnston, M., 
Mueller, N.D., O’Connell, C., Ray, D.K., West, P.C., Balzer, C., Bennett, E.M., 
Carpenter, S.R., Hill, J., Monfreda, C., Polasky, S., Rockstr¨om, J., Sheehan, J., 
Siebert, S., Tilman, D., Zaks, D.P.M., 2011. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature 
478, 337–342. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10452. 
Garibaldi, L.A., Gemmill-Herren, B., D’Annolfo, R., Graeub, B.E., Cunningham, S.A., 
Breeze, T.D., 2017. Farming approaches for greater biodiversity, livelihoods, and 
food security. Trends Ecol. Evol. 32, 68–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tree.2016.10.001. 
Groot, J.C.J., Yang, X., 2022. Trade-offs in the design of sustainable cropping systems at 
a regional level: a case study on the North China Plain. Front. Agr. Sci. Eng. 9 (2), 
295–308. https://doi.org/10.15302/J-FASE-2021434. 
Groot, J.C.J., Jellema, A., Rossing, W.A.H., 2010. Designing a hedgerow network in a 
multifunctional agricultural landscape: Balancing trade-offs among ecological 
quality, landscape character and implementation costs. Eur. J. Agron. 32, 112–119. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2009.07.002. 
Groot, J.C.J., Oomen, G.J.M., Rossing, W.A.H., 2012. Multi-objective optimization and 
design of farming systems. Agric. Syst. 110, 63–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2012.03.012. 
Headey, D., Fan, S., 2008. Anatomy of a crisis: the causes and consequences of surging 
food prices. Agric. Econ. 39, 375–391. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574- 
0862.2008.00345.x. 
Hegwood, M., Langendorf, R.E., Burgess, M.G., 2022. Why win–wins are rare in complex 
environmental management. Nat. Sustain. 5, 674–680. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41893-022-00866-z. 
Hern´andez-Ochoa, I.M., Gaiser, T., Kersebaum, K.-C., Webber, H., Seidel, S.J., 
Grahmann, K., Ewert, F., 2022. Model-based design of crop diversification through 
new field arrangements in spatially heterogeneous landscapes. A review. Agron. 
Sustain. Dev. 42, 74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-022-00805-4. 
HPBS (Hebei Provincial Bureau of Statistics), 2021. Hebei Rural Statistical Yearbook. 
China Statistics Press, Beijing (in Chinese).  
Hunt, N.D., Hill, J.D., Liebman, M., 2019. Cropping system diversity effects on nutrient 
discharge, soil erosion, and agronomic performance. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53, 
1344–1352. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02193. 
Ickowitz, A., Powell, B., Rowland, D., Jones, A., Sunderland, T., 2019. Agricultural 
intensification, dietary diversity, and markets in the global food security narrative. 
Glob. Food Secur. 20, 9–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2018.11.002. 
ISO (International Organization for Standardization), 2006. Environmental management: 
life cycle assessment; requirements and guidelines. ISO Geneva, Switzerland.  
Ito, J., Li, X., 2023. Interplay between China’s grain self-sufficiency policy shifts and 
interregional, intertemporal productivity differences. Food Policy 117, 102446. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2023.102446. 
Kanter, D.R., Musumba, M., Wood, S.L.R., Palm, C., Antle, J., Balvanera, P., Dale, V.H., 
Havlik, P., Kline, K.L., Scholes, R.J., Thornton, P., Tittonell, P., Andelman, S., 2018. 
Evaluating agricultural trade-offs in the age of sustainable development. Agric. Syst. 
163, 73–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2016.09.010. 
Kassambara, A., 2017. Practical Guide to Cluster Analysis in R. Unsupervised Machine 
Learning (Edition 1). STHDA. http://www.sthda.com. 
Kimura, S., Gay, S.H., Yu, W., 2019. China’s grains policy: impacts of alternative reform 
options. In: OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers. No. 129. OECD 
Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/aed5174b-en. 
Lambers, H., Cong, W.-F., 2022. Challenges providing multiple ecosystem benefits for 
sustainable managed systems. Front. Agric. Sci. Eng. 9 (2), 170–176. https://doi. 
org/10.15302/J-FASE-2022444. 
Li, J., Lei, H., 2021. Tracking the spatio-temporal change of planting area of winter 
wheat-summer maize cropping system in the North China Plain during 2001–2018. 
Comput. Electron. Agric. 187, 106222 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compag.2021.106222. 
Li, K., Wang, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Jiang, R., Feng, G., Liu, X., Zuo, Y., Yuan, H., 
Zhang, C., Gai, J., Tian, J., Li, H., Sun, Y., Yu, B., 2022. Evaluating the effects of 
agricultural inputs on the soil quality of smallholdings using improved indices. 
CATENA 209, 105838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2021.105838. 
Liang, Z., van der Werf, W., Xu, Z., Cheng, J., Wang, C., Cong, W.-F., Zhang, C., Zhang, F., 
Groot, J.C.J., 2022. Identifying exemplary sustainable cropping systems using a 
positive deviance approach: Wheat-maize double cropping in the North China Plain. 
Agric. Syst. 201, 103471 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103471. 
Liu, C., Plaza-Bonilla, D., Coulter, J.A., Kutcher, H.R., Beckie, H.J., Wang, L., Floc’h, J.- 
B., Hamel, C., Siddique, K.H.M., Li, L., Gan, Y., 2022. Diversifying crop rotations

Z. Liang et al.

Sustainable Production and Consumption 40 (2023) 532–544

544

enhances agroecosystem services and resilience. In: Advances in Agronomy. Elsevier. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.agron.2022.02.007 (p. S0065211322000347).  
MacLaren, C., Mead, A., van Balen, D., Claessens, L., Etana, A., de Haan, J., Haagsma, W., 
J¨ack, O., Keller, T., Labuschagne, J., Myrbeck, Å., Necpalova, M., Nziguheba, G., 
Six, J., Strauss, J., Swanepoel, P.A., Thierfelder, C., Topp, C., Tshuma, F., 
Verstegen, H., Walker, R., Watson, C., Wesselink, M., Storkey, J., 2022. Long-term 
evidence for ecological intensification as a pathway to sustainable agriculture. Nat. 
Sustain. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00911-x. 
MARA (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of China), 
2022a. Implementation Plan for Establishing National Agricultural Green 
Development Pilot Areas and Promoting Comprehensive Green Transformation in 
Agricultural Modernization Demonstration Areas (In Chinese).  
MARA (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of China), 
2022b. The Plan of National Crop Production Development for the 14th Five-Year (In 
Chinese).  
Meynard, J.-M., Charrier, F., Fares, M., Le Bail, M., Magrini, M.-B., Charlier, A., 
Mess´ean, A., 2018. Socio-technical lock-in hinders crop diversification in France. 
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 38, 54. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-018-0535-1. 
Mu, H., Wang, K., Yang, X., Xu, W., Liu, X., Ritsema, C.J., Geissen, V., 2022. Pesticide 
usage practices and the exposure risk to pollinators: A case study in the North China 
Plain. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 241, 113713 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecoenv.2022.113713. 
Nemecek, T., Hayer, F., Bonnin, E., Carrou´ee, B., Schneider, A., Vivier, C., 2015. 
Designing eco-efficient crop rotations using life cycle assessment of crop 
combinations. Eur. J. Agron. 65, 40–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.01.005. 
OECD, 2022. Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2022: Reforming 
Agricultural Policies for Climate Change Mitigation. OECD Publishing, Paris. https:// 
doi.org/10.1787/7f4542bf-en.  
Ouda, S., Zohry, A.E.-H., Noreldin, T., 2018. Crop Rotation: An Approach to Secure 
Future Food. Springer International Publishing, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
978-3-030-05351-2.  
Pei, H., Scanlon, B.R., Shen, Y., Reedy, R.C., Long, D., Liu, C., 2015. Impacts of varying 
agricultural intensification on crop yield and groundwater resources: comparison of 
the North China Plain and US High Plains. Environ. Res. Lett. 10, 044013 https:// 
doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/10/4/044013. 
Pellegrini, P., Fern´andez, R.J., 2018. Crop intensification, land use, and on-farm energy- 
use efficiency during the worldwide spread of the green revolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 115, 2335–2340. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1717072115. 
Pokhrel, A., Soni, P., 2017. Performance analysis of different rice-based cropping systems 
in tropical region of Nepal. J. Environ. Manag. 197, 70–79. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.03.035. 
Reckling, M., Hecker, J.-M., Bergkvist, G., Watson, C.A., Zander, P., Schl¨afke, N., 
Stoddard, F.L., Eory, V., Topp, C.F.E., Maire, J., Bachinger, J., 2016. A cropping 
system assessment framework—Evaluating effects of introducing legumes into crop 
rotations. Eur. J. Agron. 76, 186–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.11.005. 
Rosa-Schleich, J., Loos, J., Mußhoff, O., Tscharntke, T., 2019. Ecological-economic trade- 
offs of diversified farming systems – a review. Ecol. Econ. 160, 251–263. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.03.002. 
Saber, Z., Van Zelm, R., Pirdashti, H., Schipper, A.M., Esmaeili, M., Motevali, A., Nabavi- 
Pelesaraei, A., Huijbregts, M.A.J., 2021. Understanding farm-level differences in 
environmental impact and eco-efficiency: The case of rice production in Iran. 
Sustain. Prod. Consum. 27, 1021–1029. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.02.033. 
S´anchez, A.C., Kamau, H.N., Grazioli, F., Jones, S.K., 2022. Financial profitability of 
diversified farming systems: A global meta-analysis. Ecol. Econ. 201, 107595 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2022.107595. 
Sietz, D., Klimek, S., Dauber, J., 2022. Tailored pathways toward revived farmland 
biodiversity can inspire agroecological action and policy to transform agriculture. 
Commun. Earth Environ. 3, 211. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-022-00527-1. 
Sirami, C., Gross, N., Baillod, A.B., Bertrand, C., Carri´e, R., Hass, A., Henckel, L., 
Miguet, P., Vuillot, C., Alignier, A., Girard, J., Bat´ary, P., Clough, Y., Violle, C., 
Giralt, D., Bota, G., Badenhausser, I., Lefebvre, G., Gauffre, B., Vialatte, A., 
Calatayud, F., Gil-Tena, A., Tischendorf, L., Mitchell, S., Lindsay, K., Georges, R., 
Hilaire, S., Recasens, J., Sol´e-Senan, X.O., Roble˜no, I., Bosch, J., Barrientos, J.A., 
Ricarte, A., Marcos-Garcia, M.´A., Mi˜nano, J., Mathevet, R., Gibon, A., Baudry, J., 
Balent, G., Poulin, B., Burel, F., Tscharntke, T., Bretagnolle, V., Siriwardena, G., 
Ouin, A., Brotons, L., Martin, J.-L., Fahrig, L., 2019. Increasing crop heterogeneity

enhances multitrophic diversity across agricultural regions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
116, 16442–16447. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1906419116. 
Smith, A., Snapp, S., Chikowo, R., Thorne, P., Bekunda, M., Glover, J., 2017. Measuring 
sustainable intensification in smallholder agroecosystems: A review. Glob. Food 
Secur. 12, 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2016.11.002. 
Socolar, Y., Goldstein, B.R., de Valpine, P., Bowles, T.M., 2021. Biophysical and policy 
factors predict simplified crop rotations in the US Midwest. Environ. Res. Lett. 16, 
054045 https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abf9ca. 
Song, X., Wang, X., Li, X., Zhang, W., Scheffran, J., 2021. Policy-oriented versus market- 
induced: Factors influencing crop diversity across China. Ecol. Econ. 190, 107184 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107184. 
Talukder, B., Hipel, K.W., vanLoon, G.W., 2018. Using multi-criteria decision analysis for 
assessing sustainability of agricultural systems. Sustain. Dev. 26, 781–799. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/sd.1848. 
Ulukan, D., Grillot, M., Benoit, M., Bernes, G., Dumont, B., Magne, M.-A., Monteiro, L., 
Parsons, D., Veysset, P., Ryschawy, J., Steinmetz, L., Martin, G., 2022. Positive 
deviant strategies implemented by organic multi-species livestock farms in Europe. 
Agric. Syst. 201, 103453 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103453. 
Wang, S., Hu, Y., Yuan, R., Feng, W., Pan, Y., Yang, Y., 2019. Ensuring water security, 
food security, and clean water in the North China Plain – conflicting strategies. Curr. 
Opin. Environ. Sustain. 40, 63–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2019.09.008. 
Withers, P., Neal, C., Jarvie, H., Doody, D., 2014. Agriculture and eutrophication: where 
do we go from here? Sustainability 6, 5853–5875. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
su6095853. 
Xia, H., Qiao, Y., Li, X., Xue, Y., Wang, N., Yan, W., Xue, Y., Cui, Z., van der Werf, W., 
2023. Moderation of nitrogen input and integration of legumes via intercropping 
enable sustainable intensification of wheat-maize double cropping in the North 
China Plain: A four-year rotation study. Agric. Syst. 204, 103540 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103540. 
Xian, Y., Cai, G., Lin, J., Chen, Y., Wang, X., 2023. Comparison of crop productivity, 
economic benefit and environmental footprints among diversified multi-cropping 
systems in South China. Sci. Total Environ. 874, 162407 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2023.162407. 
Xiao, H., van Es, H.M., Amsili, J.P., Shi, Q., Sun, J., Chen, Y., Sui, P., 2022. Lowering soil 
greenhouse gas emissions without sacrificing yields by increasing crop rotation 
diversity in the North China Plain. Field Crop Res. 276, 108366 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.fcr.2021.108366. 
Yang, X., Steenhuis, T.S., Davis, K.F., Werf, W., Ritsema, C.J., Pacenka, S., Zhang, F., 
Siddique, K.H.M., Du, T., 2021. Diversified crop rotations enhance groundwater and 
economic sustainability of food production. Food Energy Secur. 10 https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/fes3.311. 
Yang, L., Zhou, Y., Meng, B., Li, H., Zhan, J., Xiong, H., Zhao, H., Cong, W., Wang, X., 
Zhang, W., Lakshmanan, P., Deng, Y., Shi, X., Chen, X., Zhang, F., 2022. Reconciling 
productivity, profitability and sustainability of small-holder sugarcane farms: A 
combined life cycle and data envelopment analysis. Agric. Syst. 199, 103392 https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103392. 
Zhang, W., Cao, G., Li, X., Zhang, H., Wang, C., Liu, Q., Chen, X., Cui, Z., Shen, J., 
Jiang, R., Mi, G., Miao, Y., Zhang, F., Dou, Z., 2016. Closing yield gaps in China by 
empowering smallholder farmers. Nature 537, 671–674. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nature19368. 
Zhao, J., Yang, Y., Zhang, K., Jeong, J., Zeng, Z., Zang, H., 2020. Does crop rotation yield 
more in China? A meta-analysis. Field Crop Res. 245, 107659 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.fcr.2019.107659. 
Zhao, Y., Wang, L., Lei, X., Wang, B., Cui, J., Xu, Y., Chen, Y., Sui, P., 2021. Reducing 
carbon footprint without compromising grain security through relaxing cropping 
rotation system in the North China Plain. J. Clean. Prod. 318, 128465 https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128465. 
Zhao, J., Chen, J., Beillouin, D., Lambers, H., Yang, Y., Smith, P., Zeng, Z., Olesen, J.E., 
Zang, H., 2022. Global systematic review with meta-analysis reveals yield advantage 
of legume-based rotations and its drivers. Nat. Commun. 13, 4926. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41467-022-32464-0. 
Zhu, Q., De Vries, W., Liu, X., Hao, T., Zeng, M., Shen, J., Zhang, F., 2018. Enhanced 
acidification in Chinese croplands as derived from element budgets in the period 
1980–2010. Sci. Total Environ. 618, 1497–1505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2017.09.289.

Z. Liang et al.