RESEARCH ARTICLE

Analyzing antifragility among smallholder farmers in
Bihar, India: An assessment of farmers’ vulnerability and
the strengths of positive deviants

Roos Adelhart Toorop1,*
, Santiago Lopez-Ridaura2
, Mangi Lal Jat3,4, Pauline Eichenseer1,
Deepak Bijarniya3
, Raj Kumar Jat5
and Jeroen C.J. Groot1,2,6

1Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, The Netherlands,
2International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), Sustainable Agrifood System Program and CGIAR
Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), Apdo, 6-641 06600, México, D.F.,
Mexico, 3International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), Sustainable Agrifood System Program, NASC
Complex, DPS Marg, New Delhi 110012, India,
4International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT), Patancheru, Hyderabad-502324, India, 5Borlaug Institute for South Asia (BISA), CIMMYT, Pusa, Samastipur,
Bihar, 848125, India and 6Bioversity International, Viale dei Tre Denari, 472/a, 00054 Maccarese (Fiumicino), Italy
*Corresponding author. Email: roos.deadelharttoorop@wur.nl

(Received 25 January 2022; revised 20 October 2022; accepted 03 January 2023)

Summary
Farmers around the world are increasingly vulnerable: climate variability is identified as the primary
stressor, but unfavorable biophysical circumstances and disturbances in the socioeconomic domain (labor
dynamics and price volatility) also affect farm management and production. To deal with these disturban-
ces, adaptations are recognized as essential. Antifragility acknowledges that adaptations and volatility are
inherent characteristics of complex systems and abandons the idea of returning to the pre-disturbance
system state. Instead, antifragility recognizes that disturbances can trigger reorganization, enabling selec-
tion and removal of weaker system features and allowing the system to evolve toward a better state. In this
study, we assessed the vulnerability of different types of smallholder farms in Bihar, India, and explored the
scope for more antifragile farming systems that can ‘bounce back better’ after disturbances. Accumulation
of stocks, creation of optionality (i.e., having multiple options for innovation) and strengthening of farmer
autonomy were identified as criteria for antifragility. We had focus group discussions with in total 92 farm-
ers and found that most expressed themselves to be vulnerable: they experienced challenges but had limited
adaptive capacity to change their situation. They mostly made short-term decisions to cope with or miti-
gate urgent challenges but did not engage in strategic planning driven by longer-term objectives. Instead,
they waited for governmental support to improve their livelihoods. Despite being confronted with similar
challenges, four positive deviant farmers showed to be more antifragile: their diverse farming systems were
abundant in stocks and optionality, and the farmers were distinguished in terms of their autonomy, com-
petence, and connectedness to peers, the community, and markets. To support antifragility among regular
farmers, adaptations at policy level may be required, for example, by shifting from a top-down toward a
bottom-up adaptation and innovation regime where initiative and cooperation are encouraged. With a
more autonomous orientation, farmers’ intrinsic motivation is expected to increase, enabling transitions
at the farm level. In this way, connected systems can be developed which are socioeconomically and bio-
physically adaptive. When practices, knowledge, and skills are continuously developed, an antifragile sys-
tem with ample stocks and optionality may evolve over time.

Keywords: Autonomy; Adaptive capacity; Smallholder farmers; Policy; Bihar

© The Author(s), 2023. Published by Cambridge University Press. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction,
provided the original article is properly cited.

Experimental Agriculture (2023), vol. 59, e4, 1–17
doi:10.1017/S0014479723000017

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Highlights

• All farm types were vulnerable and locked in with limited adaptive capacity.
• Challenges often did not jeopardize the continuity of the farms but constrained performance.
• Positive deviants showed strong autonomy and connectedness and were rich in optionality
and stocks.
• Antifragility can increase when autonomy is enhanced.

Introduction
During the second half of the 20th century, agricultural practices have radically changed through-
out South Asia: mechanization, intensification, and specialization driven by the Green Revolution
policy objectives and advancing technology led to major changes in farm management (Behera
and France, 2016; Davis et al., 2019). Introduction of chemical fertilizers, improved crop varieties
and animal breeds, irrigation, and mechanization induced changes in both the biophysical and
socioeconomic environment, aiming for improved yields, profit, or labor productivity.
Although yields increased and economy grew from these efforts (Jat et al., 2020), the gains were
distributed unequally. Nowadays, poverty and undernourishment are still the reality, among
others in Bihar, one of India’s most populous states. Continuous intensive cultivation led to soil
degradation and overexploitation of natural resources which resulted, in combination with the
changes in the biophysical and climatic environment, high degree of farm fragmentation, inade-
quate infrastructure, and weak institutions and markets, in a challenge for smallholder farmers to
sustain their livelihoods (Aryal et al., 2018; Lopez-Ridaura et al., 2018).
Climate variability is identified as the primary stressor (Singh et al., 2020), but also unfavorable
biophysical circumstances and disturbances in the socioeconomic domain (e.g., labor dynamics
and price volatility) impact farm management and likely affect production. Farming activities are
often exposed to unpredictable perturbations, for example, floods, labor shocks, or the recent
COVID-19 pandemic that cannot be anticipated. To act upon the expression to ‘expect the unex-
pected’, the ability to make changes and adaptations are recognized as essential. As farming is
subjected to the dynamics of complex systems, the focus should be on managing farms toward
their adaptive capacity, creating conditions that enable productive, but largely unspecified, future
states. It is about defining the conditions for an adaptive system that benefits and evolves from
disturbances (Darnhofer, 2020; Taleb, 2012).
The objective to optimize production systems drives the development direction toward high-
yielding mechanized agriculture, often based on capital-intensive inputs, making smallholder
farmers increasingly dependent, for instance, on external inputs, machinery, and financing.
The consequence is optimization, homogenization, and fragilization of such systems: the system
impairs in suboptimal circumstances (Altieri et al., 2015; Meynard et al., 2018; Urruty et al., 2016).
Although there has been an increasing social and political pressure for enhanced robustness (with-
standing) and resilience (recovery, ‘bounce back’) of these systems, it can be questioned whether
the current system needs enhancement or a thorough transformation (Hendrickson, 2015; Rivera-
Ferre et al., 2021). Instead of aiming for highly productive and efficient systems, here we propose
to investigate ways to become antifragile: the opposite of fragile.
A system is antifragile when it gains from disturbances (Taleb, 2012). The average performance
of an antifragile system increases as perturbations trigger selection and removal of underperform-
ing system features, while the strongest features survive. The response to the disturbance could
start with a temporary decline of performance followed by a recovery exceeding the initial per-
formance of the system. Antifragility can be developed in all systems (natural, human, financial,

2
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

social or socioeconomical, biophysical, natural, or political) and at all levels (molecules, organisms,
people, companies, or markets).
In this paper, we focus on the vulnerability of smallholder farmers in Bihar and explore options
to become more antifragile. The objectives are to: i) identify their main challenges and coping
strategies; ii) assess the scope for antifragility; and iii) learn from positive deviants who have
already transformed their farming systems toward more antifragile systems. In the discussion,
we elaborate attention points to enhance antifragility among farmers in Bihar.

Methodology
Conceptual framework
In the past decades, concepts like vulnerability, robustness, and resilience have been used to better
grasp the sustainability and understand the dynamics of socio-ecological systems (Folke et al.,
2021; Meuwissen et al., 2019). The vulnerability of a farming system can be conceptualized as
a result of the exposure and sensitivity to changing conditions and the inherent adaptive capacity
to deal with those conditions (Adger, 2006; Smit and Wandel, 2006). After a disturbance, the per-
formance of a fragile system is impaired, and the system is not able to return to the original state
over time (Figure 1a). In contrast, a robust system withstands shocks and maintains performance
within the normal variation around the mean (Figure 1b), while a resilient system is affected but
recovers over time (Figure 1c). In this study, we add antifragility to these concepts. Opposed to the
fragile response, the antifragile system (Figure 1d) improves its performance over time due to
reorganization after a disturbance (Taleb, 2012). The disturbance then triggers this reorganization,
within the field or farm or even at higher levels, enabling selection and removal of less-adapted
system features. In addition to adaptation after a disturbance, Taleb (2012) describes the impor-
tance of evolutionary improvement that can be triggered through processes like ‘tinkering’ and the
‘Barbell Strategy’. Tinkering refers to a process of trial and error informed by knowledge and expe-
rience accumulated over time (a career, a lifetime, or generations). In their commercial strategy,
farmers could apply the ‘Barbell Strategy’ which implies combining an array of low-risk activities
(limited gains in case of success, but also low losses when a failure occurs) with a small number of
high-risk activities that can potentially result in large gains when successful. These strategies
increase the adaptiveness (i.e., the capacity to change) which is necessary for evolutionary
improvement but also is a valuable asset in case of unexpected disturbances.
We present antifragility here rather as a set of features enabling an antifragile response than a
‘testable body of theory’. Building upon Taleb (2012), we identified three features as imperative to
allow antifragile responses of farming systems:

Figure 1. Responses of a system’s performance (green line) to variability in a driving variable over time (blue line). The
arrows indicate disturbances.

Experimental Agriculture
3

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

• Accumulating stocks: Reserves or storage capacity to be able to use a resource when needed
but are redundant to the system at status quo. These reserves may be of use when the system
reorganizes after a disturbance. Accumulating reserves also entails keeping debts (negative
stocks) at a low level, relative to the assets of the farm.
• Creating optionality (i.e., having multiple options): Employing multiple activities and skills
(e.g., diversity of crops grown, biodiversity, multiple sources of income and information, and
diversity of resources) which enable new opportunities. Experimentation is necessary to
develop new skills and try new practices which can be upscaled if they prove to be successful.
• Strengthening autonomy: Self-determination and self-organization that enable autonomous
decision-making, rather than relying on external help. This includes the ability and creativity
to see opportunities and customize these to the local context and to disengage from activities
which are no longer opportune.

Supplementary Material Table S1 contains a glossary with all terms.

Study area
This study focused on farmers in the villages Chaundali (district of Samastipur) and Nirpur (dis-
trict of Vaishali), located in Northern Bihar (Supplementary Material Figure S1), which were vis-
ited in January and February 2020. Previous studies from the same research team (Adelhart
Toorop et al., 2020a, 2020b) were conducted in these villages, and strong contacts had already
been established. The villages were 20 km apart from each other and considered comparable
in terms of farming systems, soils, and climate. Both villages were located at a distance of ca.
6 km from the nearest market, with poor access roads. At a weather station in Pusa,
Samastipur (<20 km from study sites), the yearly rainfall ranged from 787 to 2390 mm/year
in the time period between 2007 and 2017 with an average of 1344 mm/year. July–September were
typically the hottest (33.5 to 38.5°C) and most humid months receiving up to 70% of annual pre-
cipitation, while the lowest temperatures were recorded in January with mean temperatures rang-
ing from 7 to 10°C (Jat et al., 2018). The dominant cropping pattern is rice in kharif (monsoon,
June–October) followed by wheat in rabi (November–April) and a fallow period during zaid
(summer, April–June/July). Data for this study were collected in the middle of the rabi season
(January and February) which is a relatively quiet moment agriculturally in the year.

Methodological framework
Figure 2 gives an overview of the methodological framework. Two central questions were formu-
lated: 1) how vulnerable are different types of smallholder farmers in Bihar and 2) what are atten-
tion points to promote antifragility among smallholder farmers? These questions led to a three-
step approach where first the challenges and coping strategies of farmers were identified in order
to assess their vulnerability. Subsequently, the options to become more antifragile were explored in
focus group discussions (FGDs) with farmers and interviews with policy-informers (step 2) and in
interaction with positive deviant farmers (step 3). The last two steps constitute an iterative cycle
where the learnings from positive deviants could be discussed with and valued by farmers. Positive
deviants are defined as individuals that achieve better outcomes than their peers despite having the
same resources and constraints (Pant and Odame, 2009). The viewpoints of farmers, positive devi-
ants, and policy-informers enable the formulation of attention points to increase the antifragility
among farmers.
For clarity: in this study, we refer to farmers and positive deviants. Farmers are regular farmers,
while positive deviants are the farmers that were specifically selected as exemplary farmers with
more antifragile farming systems. Positive deviants cannot be grouped in one of the farm types, as
their farm structure and management strongly deviate from the average. Both farmers and positive
deviants were smallholders.

4
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Participant selection
Farmers were recruited for FGDs based on their willingness to participate in the study and on their
farm type. A typology constructed by Lopez-Ridaura et al. (2018) was used, as their extensive
household survey on farming systems and livelihood pursuits among 269 households in
Northern Bihar was suitable to categorize farmers in this study in the same area. Based on func-
tional and structural characteristics, five smallholder farm types were distinguished: part-time
farmers, wealthy farmers, small-scale crop and livestock farmers, medium-scale cereal crop farmers,
and resource-poor farmers (see Supplementary Material Table S2 for descriptions of each of the
farm types). In the days prior to the FGDs, quick surveys were conducted to assign farmers to a
type (Supplementary Material Table S3). Two FGDs were organized for each of the five farm types,
one in Chaundali and one in Nirpur, with about 10 farmers attending each FGD. In total, 92 farm-
ers attended the FGDs.
To understand policy-making and dissemination, we aimed at interviewing ‘policy-informers’
at all levels of the socio-institutional environment around farming in the case study area. Policy-
informers could be both governmental and nongovernmental and were involved in policy-mak-
ing, often through an advisory role. The snowball technique (Goodman, 1961) was used to get in
touch with people from village to state level. In total, 13 policy-informers were interviewed. At the
end of each interview, participants were asked to nominate positively deviating farmers which they
thought to be outstanding in terms of autonomy, optionality, and stocks, that is, the features for
antifragility. Those farmers were visited as positive deviants. We here elaborate on the practices
and trajectories of four positive deviants.

Identifying challenges and coping strategies
In FGDs, farmers were asked to list all challenges they faced to sustain their livelihoods, followed
by a discussion where farmers shared their coping strategies and potential solutions (see
Supplementary Material Table S4 for a description of the format of the FGDs). Each response
was assigned the label ‘coping’, ‘buffering’, or ‘adapting’. The response received the label: ‘coping’
when it implied continuation of the business as usual (i.e., no new skills or knowledge required);
‘buffering’ when management was adjusted to mitigate the effect; and ‘adapting’ when the
response required new knowledge and skills and implied transformation at systems level. To
reduce perception bias, two researchers assigned the labels independently.
In this way, we answered the questions: a) What challenges/constraints do farmers face to sus-
tain their livelihoods? b) How do farmers cope, buffer, or adapt to these challenges? and c) What
could be done additionally to improve the situation?

Figure 2. Methodological framework with main research questions (purple dashed boxes) to be answered through three
subsequent steps (blue boxes) with corresponding sub-questions (green boxes) and methods (orange boxes).

Experimental Agriculture
5

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Assessing scope for antifragility
In FGDs and interviews, both farmers (n = 92) and policy-informers (n = 13) were introduced to
the concept of antifragility (‘eventually gaining from an unfortunate situation’) and the three strat-
egies. They were asked to rank the following five statements based on importance: ‘I aim for a
diversified income’; ‘I am dependent on advice’; ‘Limiting the use of fertilizers and inputs is impor-
tant’; ‘Water storage is essential in case of a drought’; ‘Storage facilities to store produce are impor-
tant to get a good price on the market’. To ensure that all respondents understood the exercise, an
individual explanation was given and each statement was written in Hindi and depicted with an
icon on a card.
Each of the statements was used to trigger discussions about autonomy, optionality, and stocks,
and we compared differences between farmers and policy-informers using a Kruskal–Wallis test,
in case of significant differences followed by a Dunn’s test, to assess post hoc differences between
types (farmers and policy-informers). For all the analyses, we used R software and considered
statistical significance at P-value < 0.05. Likert scale data R-packages were used for visualization
(http://www.bryer.org/project/likert/).
To understand how farmers are supported and directed in their decision-making, we inter-
viewed people who had a stake in the development of policies (referred to as ‘policy-informers’).
Figure 3 presents the policy structure in Bihar with the research, training, and extension organ-
izations (‘knowledge generators’) in green and the governmental policy system in gray. The
knowledge generators inform the policy system and are in direct touch with farmers, as part
of research and through extension of KVKs1 which are under their direction. Within the policy
system, we distinguish ‘vision makers’, who plan and design development programs and ‘imple-
menters’ who disseminate these through extension services.
We had 13 semi-structured interviews with knowledge generators (4), vision makers (3), imple-
menters (4), and extension workers (2) to ask for their responsibilities, goals, and vulnerability
(‘what is the worst that can happen’). We addressed this question both for the position of the
interviewee and for the organization they worked for. The interview was followed by the ranking
of the strategies for antifragility and elaboration on each of the strategies. As part of this ranking,
we discussed to what extent their work contributed to the development of the three strategies (i.e.,
stock, optionality, and autonomy) at farm level and what their outlook was on agriculture for the
coming 5–10 years. Finally, we asked if they could nominate a positive deviant farm with strong
performance on the three strategies.
Through the FGDs with farmers and interviews with policy-informers, we addressed the ques-
tions: a) How are the strategies for antifragility interpreted by farmers and policy-informers? b)
How are they currently represented in the lives of farmers? and c) Is there scope to develop these
strategies?

Learning from positive deviants
Based on the nominations from policy-informers, positive deviant farmers were visited. During a
farm tour, structural (farm assets and resources) and functional (livelihood pursuits) character-
istics of the farm were listed (Supplementary Materials Table S5). A semi-structured interview
followed in which the farmer was asked for the trajectory of change and reflection on the three
strategies for antifragility.
These farm visits revealed information to answer the questions: a) What enabled positive devi-
ant farmers to transform their farming system? b) What makes their farming systems more anti-
fragile? and c) How are the three strategies for antifragility represented?

1KVK stands for Krishi Vigyan Kendra, meaning ‘farm science center’. They act as agricultural extension centers. KVKs are
usually associated with a local agricultural university and serve as link between the Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR) and farmers.

6
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Results
Challenges and coping strategies
Farmers across all farm types listed a broad array of challenges to sustain their livelihoods: water
and labor scarcity; low market prices; and low quality and access to inputs (Table 1). Farmers
coped with the majority of the challenges by bearing higher costs, leaving land fallow, or post-
poning farm management practices. Pointing at the government for support was common.
The consequences of challenges and room to maneuver differed among farm types. For the
part-time farmers and wealthy farmers, water or labor scarcity mainly resulted in higher cultiva-
tion costs: they had the means to pay higher diesel prices to use borewells or machinery. Farmers
from other farm types often had to ‘queue’ to use a community borewell or to hire laborers. These
farmers would eventually also bear the costs of being late with their practices with reduced farm
productivity. High-quality inputs were expensive and scarce resulting in inevitable yield penalties
for farmers without access to credits (often medium-scale crop and livestock farmers and resource-
poor farmers). They either bought low-quality seeds or were late with the purchase of seeds as they
did not have credits until their harvest of the previous season was sold.

Figure 3. Institutional web of policy-informers, with knowledge generators, vision makers, implementers, and extension
workers. Functions in gray are part of the governmental policy system, and functions in green are research, training, and
extension organizations.

Experimental Agriculture
7

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Table 1. Most frequently mentioned challenges with potential coping strategies. Italics categorize the strategies which
were already (widely) practiced. Colors categorize the responses as coping (orange), buffering (yellow), or adaptation
(green). In the case of white cells, the challenge was not (unanimously) recognized by the farm type

Challenge
Coping strategies

Part-time farmer
(n = 17)
Wealthy
farmer (n = 19)

Small-scale
crop-livestock
farmer (n = 20)

Medium-scale
cereal crop
farmer (n = 17)
Resource-poor
farmers (n = 20)

Water scarcity
Irrigate more, bear
increased costs
Gov. should invest
in borewells and
ponds

Deepen borewell
Gov. should
invest in
community
borewell

Gov. should
invest in
community
borewell and
ponds
Substitute
vegetables and
rice

Leave land fallow
Switch to green
fodder
Leave land fallow

Change to short
duration
varieties

Leave land fallow

Switch to green
manure or
sesbania

Switch to green
fodder

Labor scarcity
Delayed seeding
Leave land fallow
Leave land fallow
Pay high price to
get labor
Work harder

Include family
labor
Replace paddy with
sesbania
Delayed seeding

Use mechanization
Use mechanization
Include family
labor
Start machinery
cooperative
Include family
labor

Low quality and
access to inputs
(seeds, fertilizers,
and pesticides)

Bear higher costs
and lower yields
Gov. should own
shops with
licensed
products

Bear higher costs
and lower yields
Gov. should own
shops with
licensed
products

Bear higher costs
and lower
yields

Use organic
fertilizers
Pay higher price to
get scarce quality
inputs

Use vermicompost

Save seeds for
wheat

Low market prices
There should be a
minimum
support price for
vegetables

Gov. should invest
in storage for
vegetables

Gov. should
invest in
storage for
vegetables

Only cultivate for
home
consumption

Change to cash
crops which do
well on the
market

Only enter the
market for a
part of the
income

There should be
a minimum
support price
for vegetables

Lack of advice
Approach
neighbors,
researchers, and
call centers

Approach
neighbors,
researchers,
and call
centers

Poor soil quality
Level the fields to
avoid ponding
Move clay from
lowlands to
poor highlands

Use organic
fertilizers
Grow mung bean
and sesbania

Lack of credits
Bank should
provide credits
Save seeds
Do more off-
farm work

No suitable
mechanization
Start machinery
cooperative

Heat stress
Bear losses when
seeding was not
done in time

Low crop
productivity
Purchase better
seeds

8
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

In some cases, the impact of the problem was buffered through deviation from the business as
usual. Labor scarcity could be buffered through including family labor or using mechanization
instead of hiring labor; lack of seeds was partly solved by saving wheat seeds; and low market
prices were less of a problem when produce was primarily for self-consumption. In addition
to the coping and buffering responses, some solutions implied a systems transformation, that
is, rearrangement of the farming system and its management. Farmers mentioned switching crops
(especially replacing vegetables and rice), use of organic instead of artificial fertilizers, and starting
a machinery cooperative as potential options to overcome constraints. However, apart from the
use of organic fertilizers, these transformative changes were not practiced among the participants
of the FGDs. In addition to the constraints summarized in Table 1, land fragmentation, damage by
wild animals, lack of off-farm working opportunities, and poor water quality were listed as prob-
lems, but no solutions were raised. For solutions, the farmers pointed at the government to take
action.

Scope for antifragility

Insights from farmers
Farmers interpreted optionality as diversification of marketable crops, and this feature was valued
as a way to spread risks in case of climatic disasters. Although not acknowledged as optionality,
most farmers owned cattle and produced dairy products, crops (cereals), and fruit for home con-
sumption. Especially, cereal production was highly valued by all farm types, both for home con-
sumption and sales. Livestock had a subordinate role because of the high labor demand and
competition between food and feed crops. Only the farm type with livestock as livelihood strategy
(small-scale crop and livestock farmer) mentioned milk as a continuous source of income, with a
low, but stable price. The part-time farmers and resource-poor farmers relied on their income from
off-farm activities to sustain their way of farming, and a lack of off-farm job opportunities for the
resource-poor farmers was mentioned as problematic. For the other farm types, an off-farm job
was undesirable but considered an option, if necessary, to continue farming. Farmers of all types
wanted a future outside agriculture for the next generations.
There was little response to peak prices on the market. Farmers reasoned that other farmers
would respond quicker and that a good price in 1 year did not guarantee a good price for the next
year. Moreover, there was a general reluctance toward change: experimentation was not common,
and changes were implemented after others (e.g., neighbors) showed these to be successful. This
conservative attitude is also expressed in Table 1, and farmers coped with most challenges.
Stocks were mostly interpreted as storage capacity for products and were acknowledged as
important to better regulate supply and demand. Although farmers understood the benefits of
stocks like rainwater storage and soil organic matter stocks, these were not a priority. There were
communal water ponds in the villages, but as these were used by wealthier farmers who had the
means to pump, they were not perceived as stocks. On-farm storage was limited to cereals for
home consumption and wheat seeds.
When talking about autonomy, farmers referred to the freedom to say ‘no’ to advisors and
shopkeepers. Although this freedom was felt, farmers expressed the feeling of being locked in.
They acknowledged the need for change but did not take any action themselves as they expected
the government to support them with the right techniques and financial support. In general, they
felt disadvantaged when compared to farmers in other states and thought that their governmental
support was less relevant than in the neighboring states. They mentioned that in Bihar, the mini-
mum support price2 was not working and that they lacked ‘good’ markets where they could get

2Based on the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices, the Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation, Government of India, declares Minimum Support Prices (MSP) for 22 crops before their sowing seasons.

Experimental Agriculture
9

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

good prices. When discussing collectiveness versus independence, farmers expressed a strong
sense of community with neighbors and family for daily life, but that farming was restricted
to the household. In village meetings, farm-related issues were discussed and there was informa-
tion exchange about governmental projects and schemes. Despite these village meetings, there was
little (collective) power to address the challenges at hand. Farmers relied heavily on all sorts of
inputs and argued that these inputs gave the best chance to get the highest attainable yield. With
these high yields, the high costs of cultivation would pay off.

Insights from policy-informers
Policy-informers mentioned various solutions to address the challenges that farmers mentioned.
Conservation agriculture and integrated farming systems were frequently mentioned as the devel-
opment directions which could integrally solve the problems at hand. When talking about anti-
fragility, all policy-informers acknowledged the need of optionality and especially highlighted the
importance of a diversity of activities to spread risks. Nevertheless, cereals, and in particular rice,
were still seen as the most important crops of which the cultivation needed to be enhanced
through improved technology. Increasing stocks of water and soil quality were mentioned as cru-
cial for sustainable development of farming systems. Minimizing inputs was not seen as urgent.
Use of vermicompost and manure was promoted, but the use of artificial fertilizers, pesticides, and
purchased seeds was still considered to be inevitable. Policy-informers were less familiar with the
concepts of autonomy and independence, and these features were not seen as positive assets.
Enhancing farmers’ livelihoods was viewed on as a governmental responsibility, as one of the
vision makers said: ‘It is our responsibility to bring changes in farmers’ behavior and to improve
their income, their quality of life’. Being successful as governmental organization implied having
farmers adopt the promoted practices. Policy-informers were mostly skeptical about antifragility
as a concept, especially in case of shocks. In their opinion, farming systems should be robust
enough to not be affected by mild and medium-sized disturbances, and large disturbances were
undesirable.

Ranking features of antifragility
Farmers and policy-informers did not indicate clear priorities in development directions when
asked to rank features for antifragility (Figure 4). No significant differences were found between
farmers and policy-informers (Supplementary Material Method S1). All statements received both
low and high ranks, indicating that stakeholders were divided within and between groups.
Interviews and FGDs revealed that low ranks indicate lower importance but were not perceived
as unimportant. The only statement that received more low than high ranks by both farmers and
policy-informers concerned limiting the use of inputs in order to become independent. In general,
increasing optionality and stocks were understood as important for farmers to develop further, but
autonomy and independence were not seen as important characteristics to support an effective
response to disturbances.

Positive deviants
Table 2 gives an overview of four farming systems that were nominated by the interviewed policy-
informers as positively deviating from the farmer population on the basis of the three strategies.
The farmers stated that structural long-term challenges and constraints rather than unpredictable
shocks triggered them to change their farm management. Opportunities arose through their pro-
fessional network, which helped them to acquire knowledge and skills. These positive deviants
started with a phase of low-cost experiments in which new practices were developed next to
the business as usual.

10
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Only in the case of success, the practice was upscaled. The products (e.g., mushrooms, fish, and
organic vegetables) could be sold on a niche market, where good prices were received. The four
positive deviant farmers made the deliberate choice to increase their optionality, in particular
through diversification of activities. They showed independence, for instance, through direct sales,
but were nevertheless still dependent on some inputs like seeds. In Supplementary Material Box
S1, two positive deviants give a short description of their trajectories of change.

Discussion
In this study, we assessed the vulnerability of different types of smallholder farmers in Bihar and
explored the scope for more antifragile farming systems. Our results show that farmers across all
farm types were vulnerable and locked in with limited adaptive capacity to improve their situation
(Table 1). The level of vulnerability differed across farm types as adaptive capacity and exposure to
challenges depended on resource endowment. Many challenges implied either increased cultiva-
tion costs or delayed crop management practices leading to yield penalties. The higher-resource
endowed farmers (part-time farmers, wealthy farmers, and medium-scale cereal crop farmers)
could afford the higher costs, while the less-resource endowed farmers (small-scale crop-livestock

Figure 4. Results of a five-point Likert scale ranging from less important (1) to very important (5) in which farmers were
asked how important they considered the features for antifragility. Percentages indicate the share of responses that were
less important (receiving 1 or 2, left), neutral (receiving 3, middle), and important (receiving 4 or 5, right).

Experimental Agriculture
11

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

farmers and resource-poor farmers) had no means to manage higher costs, or the social context did
not allow them to have the first access to the resource. FGDs and interviews with policy-informers
revealed a strong top-down community governance and policy structure. The financial resources
and information available were translated into concrete and systematic programs which could be
adopted by farmers. With their focus on uniformity, the development programs often did not
encourage all features required for antifragility. Especially, the higher-resource endowed farmers
in this study showed limited initiative and autonomy.
The ability to take initiative (i.e., decision-making and agency) is not purely a rational process
(Moller et al., 2006; Pacilly et al., 2016; Rietveld et al., 2020). Adoption and adaptation of new
practices and technologies are related to farmers’ motivations, which can range in their degree
of autonomy and control (Jambo et al., 2019; Moller et al., 2006). Self-determination theory rec-
ognizes autonomy, competence, and connectedness as the basis on which motivation is built

Table 2. Description of production and management systems of antifragile examples

Production
system
Stocks
Optionality
Independence
Notes

Organic farm,
diversified
production

200 trees for timber,
harvested when
needed, usually
after 15 years; chili
can be stored; soil
improvement with
vermicompost led
to lower irrigation
demand.

Wide variety of crops
(incl. flowers and
medicinal herbs
which are rare);
vermicompost

Direct sales; uses
mainly organic
fertilizers; cereals
for home
consumption

At the moment no
market for organic
produce, but
expects this soon
expects to benefit
from a head start.
Already inspired 30
nearby farmers who
are also (partly)
organic now.
Satisfied with
income.

Mushroom
production 
arable
production

Mushroom residue
goes to soil;
vermicompost gives
good results

Wide variety of crops
 mushrooms
Direct sales; network
of ‘innovative
farmers’ for
knowledge
exchanges

Satisfied with income
and way of farming
Learns from doing: if
an experiment is
successful, he
increases area. Now
trials with capsicum.

Mushrooms
(oyster 
spores),
biogas, fish,
service
provider,
rents out
tube well*

Manure is source of
biogas, digestate
used as fertilizer;
has stock of biogas;
cereal stock; dries
mushrooms to
store; family
members all work
on farm and replace
each other.

Different agricultural
‘enterprises’
generating income
throughout the year.
Cultivation and
service provision
(tube well and
contract work with
own machinery)

Has own input shop
and own
machinery; Direct
sales – negotiates
price with
customers who
come to the farm.

Received training but
no/little monetary
support. Proud to
be a teacher in
mushroom
cultivation.

Fish collective*
Always produce; safety
increases with more
members (more
people to watch/
guard);

Different types of fish;
wide variety of fruits
and vegetables for
members of the
collective; labor
tasks are divided

Direct sales; no
employees, hire
temporary labor
when needed.

All members of the
collective also have
their own farming
activities.
As collective they have
more power,
government
provided electricity.

*Supplementary Material Box S1 gives a short description of the trajectories of change for these farmers.

12
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

(Ryan and Deci, 2000). In our study, these characteristics distinguished the positive deviants from
the farmers in the FGDs. Although farms within a farm type were comparable in their resources
and livelihood strategies, there was no collective power or agency (i.e., connectedness) to over-
come the constrained situation, neither to share knowledge or practical work. In contrast, the
positive deviants formed strong ties with others for production and marketing, which stimulated
learning and continuous adaptations of the farming systems management. They indicated engage-
ment and satisfaction with their systems, their daily activities, and their income.
The self-determination theory explains that coercive and external pressures tend to minimize
(intrinsic) motivation (Moller et al., 2006; Ryan and Deci, 2000). We observed this in the strong
reliance on and expectation of governmental interventions. Triggering farmers’ intrinsic motiva-
tion and connectedness is crucial to increase autonomous functioning (Stobbelaar et al., 2009).
Figure 5 schematically represents a rationale which could ultimately lead to more antifragility
at farm level. Greater autonomy will enable initiative and development of competences
(Moller et al., 2006), for example, through a dual strategy where something new is explored simul-
taneously with activities that are known and safe (Barbell Strategy) or through trial, error, and
selection (‘tinkering’). When practices, knowledge and skills are continuously developed, com-
plexity will evolve over time (Clancy, 2010; Urruty et al., 2016), and an increase in optionality
and stocks can be expected (Altieri et al., 2015; Gliessman, 2015). As a result of these assets, adap-
tiveness (i.e., capacity to adapt farming practices and cultivation choices) increases. To support
such a shift, transformation and adaptation of policies may be required. This can, for example,
start with formulation of goal-oriented and adaptive policies that promote cooperation
(Stobbelaar et al., 2009). In this way, connective systems which are socioeconomically and bio-
physically adaptive can be aimed for.
When interpreting the results presented here, the limitations of the research context should be
considered. In this study, we organized FGDs to identify challenges and coping strategies of dif-
ferent types of smallholder farmers. In order to have farmers available, the FGDs were planned in
the middle of the rabi season (January and February) which is a relatively quiet moment in the
year. Our results and analysis are based on a snapshot in time, while the perception of challenges
may be dynamic (Nikolaski et al., 2018). The challenges listed in Table 1 can be identified as struc-
tural problems or long-term stressors. Although Bihar is known for its vulnerability caused by

Figure 5. Relationship between autonomy and the ability to develop optionality and stocks, to reinforce adaptiveness in
case of a disturbance.

Experimental Agriculture
13

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

climatic anomalies (Chhabra and Haris, 2015; Lopez-Ridaura et al., 2018; Shirsath et al., 2017),
sudden disturbances and shocks were hardly mentioned. This can be explained by the lower fre-
quency of the shocks compared to the continuous stress of the daily challenges and the age of the
participants. Only challenges that were shared among all participants of the FGDs were listed, and
younger farmers may not have been exposed to less frequent shocks. Although the list of chal-
lenges may not be exhaustive, understanding of the stressors is an indispensable first step toward
increasing the systems’ vulnerability to shocks (Tendall et al., 2015).
Four positive deviant farms showed that it was feasible to deviate from the dominating wheat–
rice production systems. We did not collect data on their performance indicators and were there-
fore not able to show quantitative (statistical) deviance compared to average farmers. Because the
positive deviant farmers showed optionality, stocks, and autonomy, we expect them to be more
antifragile, but we do not have direct evidence in terms of differences in system dynamics between
their farms and average farms. Moreover, it was difficult to single out success factors with this
small and normatively selected sample of positive deviant farmers. To go beyond the explorative
nature of this study, the social and agronomical performance and development of different types
of positive deviant farming systems should be better understood. Clear indicators for positive
deviance should then be developed. These positive deviants received help from governmental pro-
grams, which is probably why they were known by the policy-informers who nominated them.
Although they showed higher levels of autonomy and seemed to not to rely on the extra attention
they got, their flagship position may have also helped them to develop.
In this study, we elaborate on the term ‘antifragility’, that was first introduced by Taleb (2012),
as a dynamic system property in socio-ecological systems. The features contributing to antifra-
gility are not new in the scientific literature. A few examples: optionality, especially in the form
of diversity, is widely acknowledged to foster adaptation. Ecological, social, and political diversity
are promoted to increase options and reduce risks (Altieri et al., 2015; Hoy, 2015; Lade et al.,
2020). Stocks in various forms contribute as a buffer against failure, redundancy, and diversity
and avoid that the loss of critical system components triggers dramatic changes in the system
dynamics (Altieri et al., 2015; Hodbod and Eakin, 2015). Fraser et al. (2015) and Stave and
Kopainsky (2015) relate the importance of stocks to food security. Autonomy or self-organization
in biological, social, and ecological systems should avoid top-down suppression and reliance and
supports the self-organizing properties of diverse entities at local scales (Berkes, 2007; Hoy, 2015).
Antifragility has overlap with the scientific literature describing adaptive management, adap-
tation, resilience, and transformation: it requires, for example, that adaptation and transformation
benefit from disturbances and evolve. Antifragility, however, aims to use disturbances to improve
the system and to increase its performance. It does not aim at stability, coping, or recovery;
instead, it requires long-term learning, trial, and adaptation to structurally gain from ‘disorder’
(e.g., rapid and unpredictable changes). The resilient system dynamics described by, for example,
Darnhofer (2021) (i.e., transformation after unexpected shocks) and Tendall et al. (2015) (i.e.,
eradicate weaknesses to build capacities) could therefore be recognized as antifragile responses.
Moreover, movements like agroecology and organic agriculture claim to reduce vulnerability
and increase resilience due to attention to crop and animal diversification, maintenance of local
genetic diversity, crop rotations, and organic matter and nutrient cycles (Altieri et al., 2015), and
these systems may often have antifragile responses. However, similar to the concept of resilience
thinking, antifragility is still a paradigm rather than a testable concept. A framework for collecting
empirical evidence for antifragility in agroecosystems still needs to be developed.
This study explored the scope to increase antifragility at farm level. However, farmers are, as
primary producers, influenced by commercial (traders, breeders, and financers) and public insti-
tutes (Figure 3) all with their own objectives (Pacilly et al., 2016). True antifragility extends to this
whole system. Recent studies on the impact of COVID-19 on the food system have found that long
supply chains are more vulnerable (Kumar et al., 2021; Meuwissen et al., 2019; Rivera-Ferre et al.,
2021), and that connectedness, flexibility, and diversity throughout the supply chain were

14
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

beneficial in dealing with the crisis. These studies suggest that a trajectory toward more antifra-
gility at the farm level ideally goes hand in hand with rigorous rethinking of the hierarchical struc-
tures and desirable sizes of food systems.

Conclusions
Farming systems are increasingly exposed to unpredictable perturbations. Antifragile systems
thrive in such situations, as their configuration and characteristics enable them to change and
adapt when necessary. The concept of antifragility could provide a new perspective on ‘sustain-
ability’ in the agricultural domain, although a framework that collects empirical evidence should
be developed.
This study used a case study approach to explore the concept of antifragility at farm level.
Farmers across all farm types in the two villages in Bihar, India, appeared to be vulnerable
and locked in with limited adaptive capacity to overcome the challenges at hand. Four positive
deviants that were more autonomous and richer in optionality and stocks were expected to be
more antifragile and thus able to deal better with unexpected shocks and disturbances. We con-
clude that supporting antifragility at the farm level requires changes at policy level. This could start
with the formulation of goal-oriented and adaptive policies that promote cooperation and farm-
ers’ autonomous decision-making. This may result in a more proactive attitude enabling devel-
opment of competences leading to more optionality and stocks. That, in turn, will increase the
adaptiveness of the farmer and the farm enterprise.

Supplementary
material.
For
supplementary
material
accompanying
this
paper
visit
https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0014479723000017

Acknowledgements. We thank the farmers for their time and for sharing their experiences and expertise.

Financial Support. We acknowledge the financial and technical support from CGIAR Research Programs on Climate
Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), Wheat Agri-food Systems (WHEAT), Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR), and all donors who supported this research through their contributions to the CGIAR Fund. For a list
of Fund donors, please see: http://www.cgiar.org/our-funders/. The contribution of JCJG was supported by the Senior
Expert program of the Dutch Science Council (NWO), grant number 17222.

Conflicts of Interest. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

Adelhart Toorop R., Ceccarelli V., Bijarniya D., Jat M.L., Jat R.K., Lopez-Ridaura S. and Groot J.C.J. (2020a). Using a
positive deviance approach to inform farming systems redesign: A case study from Bihar, India. Agricultural Systems 185,
102942. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102942.
Adelhart Toorop R., Lopez-Ridaura S., Bijarniya D., Kalawantawanit E., Jat R.K., Prusty A.K., Jat M.L. and Groot J.C.J.
(2020b). Farm-level exploration of economic and environmental impacts of sustainable intensification of rice-wheat crop-
ping systems in the Eastern Indo-Gangetic plains. European Journal of Agronomy 121, 126157. doi: 10.1016/j.eja.2020.
126157.
Adger W.N. (2006). Vulnerability. Global Environmental Change 16, 268–281. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.02.006.
Altieri M.A., Nicholls C.I., Henao A. and Lana M.A. (2015). Agroecology and the design of climate change-resilient farming
systems. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, Springer-Verlag France, pp. 869–890. doi: 10.1007/s13593-015-0285-2.
Aryal J.P., Jat M.L., Sapkota T.B., Khatri-Chhetri A., Kassie M., Rahut D.B. and Maharjan S. (2018). Adoption of multiple
climate-smart agricultural practices in the Gangetic plains of Bihar, India. International Journal of Climate Change
Strategies and Management. doi: 10.1108/ijccsm-02-2017-0025.
Behera U.K. and France J. (2016). Integrated farming systems and the livelihood security of small and marginal farmers in
India and other developing countries. Advances in Agronomy 138, 235–282. doi: 10.1016/bs.agron.2016.04.001.
Berkes F. (2007). Understanding uncertainty and reducing vulnerability: Lessons from resilience thinking. Natural Hazards
41, 283–295. doi: 10.1007/s11069-006-9036-7.
Chhabra V. and Haris A.A. (2015). Climate variability, extreme rainfall and temperature events over different agro-ecological
zones of Bihar. Journal of AgriSearch 2, 189–194.

Experimental Agriculture
15

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Clancy T.R. (2010). Diamonds in the rough: Positive deviance and complexity. Journal of Nursing Administration 40, 53–56.
doi: 10.1097/NNA.0b013e3181cb97d9.
Darnhofer I. (2020). Farm resilience in the face of the unexpected: Lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic. Agriculture and
Human Values 37, 605–606. doi: 10.1007/s10460-020-10053-5.
Davis K.F., Chhatre A., Rao N.D., Singh D., Ghosh-Jerath S., Mridul A., Poblete-Cazenave M., Pradhan N. and DeFries R.
(2019). Assessing the sustainability of post-Green Revolution cereals in India. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 116, 25034–25041. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1910935116.
Folke C., Haider L.J., Lade S.J., Norström A.V. and Rocha J. (2021). Commentary: Resilience and social-ecological systems:
A handful of frontiers. Global Environmental Change 71. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102400.
Fraser E.D.G., Legwegoh A. and KC K. (2015). Food stocks and grain reserves: Evaluating whether storing food creates
resilient food systems. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences 5, 445–458. doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0276-2.
Gliessman S.R. (2015). Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems (E. W. Engles, Ed.), 3rd edn, Santa Cruz: CRC
Press Taylor & Francis Group. Retrieved from https://books.google.nl/books?hl=nl&lr=&id=AVi3BgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&
pg=PP1&dq=gliessmanagroecology,theecologyofsustainablefoodsystems&ots=YnNos30GXT&sig=wvu0z
LAXzLgI8bLFxejKuIYp0j4#v=onepage&q=gliessmanagroecology%2Ctheecologyofsustainablefoodsys
Goodman L.A. (1961). Snowball sampling. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 32, 148–170.
Hendrickson M.K. (2015). Resilience in a concentrated and consolidated food system. Journal of Environmental Studies and
Sciences 5, 418–431. doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0292-2.
Hodbod J. and Eakin H. (2015). Adapting a social-ecological resilience framework for food systems. Journal of Environmental
Studies and Sciences 5, 474–484. doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0280-6.
Hoy C.W. (2015). Agroecosystem health, agroecosystem resilience, and food security. Journal of Environmental Studies and
Sciences 5, 623–635. doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0322-0.
Jambo I.J., Groot J.C.J., Descheemaeker K., Bekunda M. and Tittonell P. (2019). Motivations for the use of sustainable
intensification practices among smallholder farmers in Tanzania and Malawi. NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life
Sciences 89, 100306. doi: 10.1016/j.njas.2019.100306.
Jat M.L., Chakraborty D., Ladha J.K., Rana D.S., Gathala M.K., McDonald A. and Gerard B. (2020). Conservation
agriculture for sustainable intensification in South Asia. Nature Sustainability 3, 336–343. doi: 10.1038/s41893-020-
0500-2.
Jat R.K., Singh R.G., Kumar M., Jat M.L., Parihar C.M., Bijarniya D., Sutaliya J.M., Jat M.K., Parihar M., Kakraliya S.K.
and Gupta R.K. (2018). Ten years of conservation agriculture in a rice–maize rotation of Eastern Gangetic Plains of India:
Yield trends, water productivity and economic profitability. Field Crops Research 232, 1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.fcr.2018.12.004.
Kumar P., Singh S.S., Pandey A.K., Singh R.K., Srivastava P.K., Kumar M., Dubey S.K., Sah U., Nandan R., Singh S.K.,
Agrawal P., Kushwaha A., Rani M., Biswas J.K. and Drews M. (2021). Multi-level impacts of the COVID-19 lockdown on
agricultural systems in India: The case of Uttar Pradesh. Agricultural Systems 187, 103027. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2020.103027.
Lade S.J., Steffen W., de Vries W., Carpenter S.R., Donges J.F., Gerten D., Hoff H., Newbold., T., Richardson K. and
Rockström J. (2020). Human impacts on planetary boundaries amplified by Earth system interactions. Nature
Sustainability 3, 119–128. doi: 10.1038/s41893-019-0454-4.
Lopez-Ridaura S., Frelat R., Van Wijk M.T., Valbuena D., Krupnik T.J. and Jat M.L. (2018). Climate smart agriculture,
farm household typologies and food security: An ex-ante assessment from Eastern India Agricultural Systems 159, 57–68.
doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2017.09.007.
Meuwissen M.P.M., Feindt P.H., Spiegel A., Termeer C.J.A.M., Mathijs E., de Mey Y., Finger R., Balmann A., Wauters E.,
Urquhart J., Vigani M., Zawalińska K., Herrera H., Nicholas-Davies P., Hansson H., Paas W., Slijper T., Coopmans I.,
Vroege W., Ciechomska A., Accatino F., Kopainsky B., Poortvliet P.M., Candel J.J.L., Maye D., Severini S., Senni S.,
Soriano B., Lagerkvist C.J., Peneva M., Gavrilescu C. and Reidsma P. (2019). A framework to assess the resilience of
farming systems. Agricultural Systems 176, 102656. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2019.102656.
Meynard J.M., Charrier F., Fares M., Le Bail M., Magrini M.B., Charlier A. and Messéan A. (2018). Socio-technical lock-in
hinders crop diversification in France. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 38. doi: 10.1007/s13593-018-0535-1.
Moller A.C., Ryan R.M. and Deci E.L. (2006). Self-determination theory and public policy: Improving the quality of con-
sumer decisions without using coercion. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 25, 104–116. doi: 10.1509/jppm.25.1.104.
Nikolaski Z. Christiaensen L. and Hill R. (2018). Household shocks and coping mechanism: evidence from Sub-Saharan
Africa. Telling Myths from Facts. Directions in Development—Agriculture and Rural Development, (November 2017),
123–134. Retrieved from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/85313/1/PagesfromAgricultureinAfrica_Bookfinal.pdf
Pacilly F.C.A., Groot J.C.J., Hofstede G.J., Schaap B.F. and van Bueren E.T.L. (2016). Analysing potato late blight control as
a social-ecological system using fuzzy cognitive mapping. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 36. doi: 10.1007/s13593-
016-0370-1.
Pant L.P. and Odame H.H. (2009). The promise of positive deviants: bridging divides between scientific research and local
practices in smallholder agriculture. Knowledge Management for Development Journal 5, 160–172. doi: 10.1080/
18716340903201504.

16
Roos Adelhart Toorop et al.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Rietveld A., Van Der Burg M. and Groot J.C.J. (2020). Bridging youth and gender studies to analyse rural young women and
men ’ s livelihood pathways in Central Uganda. Journal of Rural Studies, 0–1. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2020.01.020.
Rivera-Ferre M.G., López-i-Gelats F., Ravera F., Oteros-Rozas E., di Masso M., Binimelis R. and El Bilali H. (2021). The
two-way relationship between food systems and the COVID19 pandemic: causes and consequences. Agricultural Systems
191, 103134. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103134.
Ryan R.M. and Deci E.L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development,
and well-being. American Psychologist 55, 68–78. doi: 10.1037//0003-066x.55.1.68.
Shirsath P.B., Aggarwal P.K., Thornton P.K. and Dunnett A. (2017). Prioritizing climate-smart agricultural land use
options at a regional scale. Agricultural Systems 151, 174–183. doi: 10.1016/J.AGSY.2016.09.018.
Singh R.K., Singh A., Kumar S., Sheoran P., Sharma D.K., Stringer L.C., Quinn C.H., Kumar A. and Singh D. (2020).
Perceived climate variability and compounding stressors: Implications for risks to livelihoods of smallholder Indian farm-
ers. Environmental Management, 1–19. doi: 10.1007/s00267-020-01345-x.
Smit B. and Wandel J. (2006). Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. Global Environmental Change 16, 282–292.
doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.03.008.
Stave K.A. and Kopainsky B. (2015). A system dynamics approach for examining mechanisms and pathways of food supply
vulnerability. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences 5, 321–336. doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0289-x.
Stobbelaar D.J., Groot J.C.J., Bishop C., Hall J. and Pretty J. (2009). Internalization of agri-environmental policies and the
role of institutions. Journal of Environmental Management 90, S175–S184. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.11.019.
Taleb N.N. (2012). Antifragile - things that gain from disorder. London: Penguin Books Ltd.
Tendall D.M., Joerin J., Kopainsky B., Edwards P., Shreck A., Le Q.B., Kruetli P., Grant M. and Six J. (2015). Food system
resilience: Defining the concept. Global Food Security 6, 17–23. doi: 10.1016/j.gfs.2015.08.001.
Urruty N., Tailliez-Lefebvre D. and Huyghe C. (2016). Stability, robustness, vulnerability and resilience of agricultural systems.
A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, Springer-Verlag France, pp. 1–15. doi: 10.1007/s13593-015-0347-5.

Cite this article: Adelhart Toorop R, Lopez-Ridaura S, Jat ML, Eichenseer P, Bijarniya D, Jat RK, and Groot JCJ. Analyzing
antifragility among smallholder farmers in Bihar, India: An assessment of farmers’ vulnerability and the strengths of positive
deviants. Experimental Agriculture. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017

Experimental Agriculture
17

https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479723000017
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 172.215.217.192, on 27 Sep 2026 at 22:26:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at