Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

Available online 3 October 2023
0301-4797/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).

Research article

Farmers perceive diminishing ecosystem services, but overlook dis-services 
in intensively used agricultural landscapes in the North China Plain

Jiali Cheng a,b,c,*, Zhan Xu b,c, Zhengyuan Liang a,b,c, Fan Li e,f, Wen-Feng Cong b,**, 
Chaochun Zhang b, Lei Song g, Chong Wang b, Fusuo Zhang b, Andries Richter d, 
Wopke van der Werf c, Jeroen C.J. Groot a

a Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700, AK, Wageningen, the Netherlands 
b State Key Laboratory of Nutrient Use and Management, College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China 
c Centre for Crop Systems Analysis, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700, AK, Wageningen, the Netherlands 
d Environmental Economics and Natural Resources Group, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 8130, 6700, EW, Wageningen, the Netherlands 
e College of Economics and Management, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China 
f Macro Agriculture Research Institute, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China 
g Quzhou County Agricultural Bureau, Quzhou County, 057250, Handan City, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Keywords: 
Simplified agricultural landscape 
Landscape management 
Farming 
Stakeholder 
Perception 
Socio-ecological

A B S T R A C T

The UN sustainable development goals ask countries to advance sustainable production methods in agriculture. 
While the need for a transition to sustainable agricultural production is widely felt, there is little insight into local 
stakeholders’ perceptions regarding agroecosystem (dis)services in areas with intensive production methods. The 
North China Plain is an agricultural production area with intensive production systems and simplified agricul­
tural landscapes. We conducted a survey with 267 farmers in Quzhou county in the North China Plain in 2020 to 
measure the perceived level of agroecosystem (dis)services supply and the changes therein between 2015 and 
2020. We analyzed which explanatory factors were associated with farmers’ perceptions. Provisioning services 
were at a high level, while the regulating and supporting ecosystem services were considered to be in low supply, 
as evidenced by low scores for the presence of natural enemies and earthworms, and for natural habitats such as 
hedgerows and windbreaks. Most of the participants did not perceive dis-services from agriculture. Differences in 
perception between villages with contrasting biophysical and socio-economic conditions highlight the relevance 
of contextualized policy development for agricultural landscape composition and configuration to manage 
ecosystem (dis)services.

1. Introduction

The global call for action on United Nations’ 2030 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) emphasizes the urgent need for environ­
mental sustainability and responsible resource management, especially 
in agricultural systems (DeClerck et al., 2016; UN General Assembly, 
2015). The global concerns have triggered various initiatives in China. 
In 2016, the China central government’s No. 1 Document proposed the 
concept of “Agriculture Green Development” as a point of departure for 
sustainable intensification in agricultural landscapes (State Council, 
2016). This was made actionable with the Rural Revitalization Strategy

of 2017 and the “14th Five-Year National Agriculture Green Develop­
ment Plan” published in 2021 (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
2021). One of the main goals of Agriculture Green Development is to 
deliver balanced multiple agroecosystem services, reduce dis-services 
and improve human well-being (Shen et al., 2020). Assessment of the 
supply of multiple agroecosystem (dis)services is the benchmark to­
wards integrating ecosystem services into agricultural landscape plan­
ning, management, and decision-making (de Groot et al., 2010). 
We zoomed in on the North China Plain as a case study area because 
it is an intensive crop production area that is critical to China’s food 
security, producing approximately a quarter of China’s grain (NBSC,

* Corresponding author. Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700, AK, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 
** Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Nutrient Use and Management, College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing 100193, China. 
E-mail addresses: jiali.cheng@wur.nl, jialicheng11@gmail.com (J. Cheng), wenfeng.cong@cau.edu.cn (W.-F. Cong).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Environmental Management

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jenvman

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.119060 
Received 7 April 2023; Received in revised form 4 July 2023; Accepted 30 August 2023

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

2

2019). Double cropping of winter wheat (grown from October to June) 
and summer maize (from June to October) is one of the main cropping 
systems in the North China Plain. This cropping system has high yearly 
grain output, but has relatively low performance regarding regulating, 
supporting, and cultural services (Zhou et al., 2017). Moreover, there is 
a high risk of dis-services, for instance, water pollution by nitrogen 
losses (Meng et al., 2022), high greenhouse gas emissions (Zhao et al., 
2021) and groundwater table decline (Zhang et al., 2003). 
Previous work, using the methods of emergy (Odum, 1996) and life 
cycle assessment has indicated unsustainable agroecosystem conditions 
in the North China Plain (Cui et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2015). However, key 
scientific information is missing on essential multiple agroecosystem 
(dis)services at the landscape level like biological control and cultural 
services. Conducting quantitative biophysical assessment on multiple 
ecosystem (dis)services is costly and time-consuming, and survey 
methods offer an attractive low-cost alternative. For cultural services, 
surveys might even be a more appropriate instrument to collect the in­
formation because such services are intrinsically based on stakeholder 
perceptions. It stands to reason to ask local actors about the current state 
and recent historic trends in agroecosystem services and dis-services in 
their region, to capitalize on local knowledge, which can be accom­
plished with relatively limited costs for a broad suite of services. 
Another advantage of using stakeholder surveys is that an agricul­
tural green development transition can only be realized with the support 
of local stakeholders. Hence, it is necessary to also explore farmers’ 
perceptions about the main agroecosystem (dis)services and the tem­
poral change in their supply. Farmers shape agroecosystem (dis)services 
as decision-makers, influenced by landscape features and policies (de

Snoo et al., 2013). Their perceptions, reflecting local knowledge, com­
plement biophysical measurements, particularly for cultural (dis)ser­
vices (Dawoe et al., 2012; de Groot et al., 2002). Perception-based 
surveys have the potential to efficiently gather local-specific informa­
tion on agroecosystem (dis)services (Chen et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2022), 
aiding policymakers and managers in implementing context-specific 
policies (Vrebos et al., 2015). 
Villages in China vary in ecological and social-economic conditions 
(Wang et al., 2021), which may impact agroecosystem (dis)services 
(Yang and Wang, 2022) and eventually rural development (Cao et al., 
2020; Domon, 2011). Socioecological conditions and landscape patterns 
affect agroecosystem (dis)services and thus people’s perceptions (Wang 
et al., 2021; W. Zhang et al., 2016; Zoderer et al., 2019). While agri­
cultural policies are typically implemented at the village level, there is 
little information on contextual factors at the village level for enhancing 
agroecosystem (dis)services in the North China Plain. 
In intensively managed agricultural landscapes, we expect that the 
regulating and supporting services would be low and there should be 
signs of dis-services. We also expect that farmers’ perceptions could be 
associated with socio-economic factors and biophysical characteristics 
of villages. In this paper, we aim to assess the perception of farmers 
regarding the delivery of agroecosystem services and dis-services in a 
landscape dominated by intensive cropping systems in Quzhou county 
within the North China Plain. We quantified the perceived supply of 
these services and the changes therein during 2015~2020. To investi­
gate how village characteristics affect the perception of agroecosystem 
(dis)services, we further analyzed the relations between explanatory 
factors and multiple agroecosystem (dis)services. Finally, we compared

Fig. 1. Location of the North China Plain (a) and Quzhou county (b) and of sampled villages within Quzhou County (c). The elevation is derived from 12.5 m Digital 
Elevation Model (DEM) topographic data (https://search.asf.alaska.edu/).

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

3

agroecosystem (dis)services in different village types.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Case study area

The case study area is Quzhou county, an affiliated administrative 
region of Handan City, Heibei Province, located in the middle of the 
North China Plain (Fig. 1). As a representative area in the North China 
Plain, Quzhou has been selected as a National Agriculture Green 
Development Pilot Demonstration Zone in 2019. Since 2020, the Quz­
hou government has formulated policies to transform the county to­
wards sustainable agricultural development in the context of the 
Agricultural Green Development program. 
The surface area of Quzhou is 676.7 km2 including 525.2 km2 of 
cropland (NBSC, 2017). The landscapes in Quzhou County are for the 
most part homogenized agricultural landscapes with arable cropping 
and little area of non-crop habitat. The soil in Quzhou is calcareous al­
luvial with loamy texture, high soil pH, relatively low soil organic 
matter, and historically high salt content (K. Li et al., 2022; Liang et al., 
2022). There are three main rivers (Fuyang River, Zhizhang River, and 
Laosha River). Quzhou is located in a semi-humid continental monsoon 
climate zone, with an average annual temperature of 13.1 ◦C and an 
average annual average precipitation of 534.9 mm, while most precip­
itation occurs between July and September. Winter wheat, summer 
maize and cotton are the main crops. The tree cover area in Quzhou 
county is 86.7 km2, mainly consisting of linear windbreaks (Li, 2014; 
NBSC, 2017). Since 2015, Quzhou has enacted a fallow policy that 
discourages the winter wheat-summer maize cropping system to save 
groundwater. Around 2300 ha of winter wheat-summer maize system 
was replaced by spring maize, spring cotton or other water-saving sys­
tems (Quzhou County Government, 2020). 
Quzhou County consists of 10 townships and 342 administrative 
villages. According to NBSC (2017), 85.5% of the population in Quzhou 
County is rural. The total agricultural revenue amounted to 1.03 billion 
CNY 2017 (around 0.15 billion USD), which comprises 7.6% of the 
county’s total economic output.

2.2. Methodological framework

The ecosystem services and dis-services framework used in this study

(Fig. 2) is based on the four common categories of provisioning services, 
regulating services, supporting services, and cultural services (MEA, 
2005). The framework is adapted to include dis-services (Zhang et al., 
2007) as well as locally relevant interactions between agroecosystem 
(dis)services and the agricultural landscape (Fig. 2). Crop production 
benefits from supporting and regulating services, but can be negatively 
affected by dis-services. In turn, the cropping activities result in provi­
sioning services and contribute to non-material services, but they also 
deliver dis-services to the agroecosystem. This framework and a litera­
ture review were used to create a list of proxy indicators for relevant 
agroecosystem (dis)services and to formulate a questionnaire to assess 
perceptions of the state of agroecosystem (dis)services in 2020 and the 
perceived trend of change in the period between 2015 and 2020. 
The survey targeted farmers within 35 villages in 2020. The selection 
of villages was based upon a pre-defined village typology in order to 
cover the diversity of villages (see Section 2.3). A redundancy analysis 
(RDA) was done to investigate relationships between village character­
istics and the perceived supply of agroecosystem (dis)services in 2020. 
Finally, we analyzed differences in agroecosystem (dis)services among 
village types.

2.3. Selection of villages and farmers

Participants were selected using a stratified sampling approach, 
based on a village typology (see Supplementary Materials S2). This ty­
pology classified the villages of Quzhou county into eight different types 
based on biophysical, socioeconomic, and agricultural production 
characteristics from previous survey data and yearbook data. The seven 
village types which had agricultural production were selected for further 
research (thus excluding the village type without agricultural produc­
tion), and five villages were randomly selected from each village type, 
resulting in 35 selected villages in total. In each village, we selected for 
participation in the survey five smallholder farmers, up to two leader 
farmers and the village head. The smallholder farmers had experience in 
crop production and were randomly selected per village. Leader farmers 
are defined as farmers running comparatively professional farms, or had 
participated in professional farmers’ training. If no leader farmers who 
met the criteria were available, we interviewed additional smallholder 
farmers instead (coded as smallholder farmers). Leader farmers were 
identified with the help of the village heads. The 35 village heads were 
also participating in agricultural production, so that all survey

Fig. 2. Main interrelations between agroecosystem services and dis-services, and crop production in the agricultural landscape of Quzhou county. Agroecosystem 
(dis)services in orange boxes affect the agricultural landscape, while services and dis-services in blue boxes are affected by agriculture. The green arrows indicate 
services, whereas the red arrows indicate dis-services (adapted from Zhang et al., 2007).

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

4

respondents can be regarded as farmers. In total, 267 people completed 
the survey, including 187 smallholders, 45 leader farmers and 35 village 
heads.

2.4. Survey

The survey was conducted in December 2020 using a structured 
questionnaire, consisting of three parts: 1) demographic and personal 
information of participants, e.g., age, gender, and education; 2) crop 
production information such as total planting area of each crop, annual 
average revenue (price times production) of each crop; and 3) percep­
tions of agroecosystem services and dis-services. Perceptions were 
quantified by scoring proxy indicators of supply and changes in the 
period between 2015 and 2020 on a Likert Scale from 1 to 5 (Table S1). 
Due to the length of the questionnaire, we were not able to ask for all 
kinds of costs explicitly for calculating the net revenue. Therefore, we 
had to rely on gross revenue, ignoring the costs of planting crops, which 
is an obvious limitation of our study. The questionnaire was tested 
through 3 rounds of pilot surveys with local experts and farmers from 
October to November 2020. This resulted in elimination of indicators 
that were considered not locally relevant, such as soil erosion. During 
the pilot surveys, we iteratively revised the questionnaire to ensure that 
the questions would be understandable for the respondents. During the 
interview, the meaning of each ecosystem (dis)service was explained. 
The interviewer team of 9 persons was trained before going into the field 
and had background knowledge of survey methods and familiarity with 
the local dialect. After the entire survey was completed, the quality of

each questionnaire was examined. Details of the questionnaire in­
dicators used in this study are listed in Table S1 in Supplementary 
Materials.

2.5. Data on explanatory factors

Multiple data sources were used to describe the characteristics of 
each village (Table 1).

2.6. Data analysis

Indicator scores were visualized using the “Likert” (Bryer et al., 
2016) and “ggplot2” packages (Wickham et al., 2016) in R (R Core 
Team, 2021). To analyze how village-level characteristics were associ­
ated with the perceived agroecosystem services and dis-services supply 
in 35 villages, a redundancy analysis (RDA) was conducted using 
village-averaged indicator scores and village-specific biophysical and 
socio-economic variables. RDA is a widely used analysis to explore the 
correlation between multiple response variables (agroecosystem ser­
vices and dis-services supply in this case) and a set of explanatory var­
iables (socio-ecological factors in this case). Prior to the RDA, the 
indicator values of agroecosystem (dis)services supply and variables 
representing village characteristics were standardized to zero mean and 
unit variance. A Monte Carlo permutation test (1000 permutations) was 
performed to determine the significance of the associations between 
village characteristics and (dis)services. The RDA and the data trans­
formation were done using the “vegan” package in R (Oksanen et al.,

Box 1 
The terms used in this paper.

• Agroecosystem services and dis-services: Ecosystem services are “the benefits people obtain from ecosystems” (MEA, 2005). They entail 
the products (for profit) or the (non)material goods (for use) that people gain from agroecosystems. Dis-services are negative impacts on 
agroecosystems or humans.  
• Agroecosystems: Ecosystems used for agricultural production.  
• Ecosystem services supply: The provisioning of a specific bundle of ecosystem goods and services within a given time period in an area.  
• Perceived ecosystem services supply: Flow of ecosystem (dis)services from certain ecosystems (provider) as experienced by people 
(receiver).  
• Trend of ecosystem service supply: Temporal changes of ecosystem services supply during the time period of 2015–2020.

Table 1 
Explanatory factors describing the characteristics of villages involved in the survey.

Factors 
Unit 
Data sources and/or calculation method

Soil properties  
Soil survey data in 2018 (Li et al., 2022b) 
SOM (soil organic matter) 
g/kg 
Inverse distance weighted method to calculate the village average in ArcMap 10.8. (https://www.esri.com/en-us/arcgis/ 
products/arcgis-desktop) 
TN (soil total nitrogen) 
g/kg 
EC (electrical conductivity) 
dS/m

Agricultural inputs  
Household survey data in 2020 (Liang et al., 2022). 
Fertilizer use amount 
kg N ha−1

year−1

See Section S5 in Supplementary Materials for the calculation method.

Pesticide use frequency 
TFI 
Calculation method is based on Liang et al. (2022)

Main crop type proportion  
Village head survey data, 2020 
Cereals 
% 
Winter wheat-Summer maize area or spring maize area/total crop production area 
Fiber crops 
% 
Cotton area/total crop production area 
Fruit trees 
% 
Fruit trees area/total crop production area 
Sugar crops 
% 
Stevia area/total crop production area 
Vegetables 
% 
Vegetables area/total crop production area

Location advantages  
LULC map and administrative map 
Distance to the county center (Quzhou 
city) 
km 
Methods of spatial join (closet) in ArcGIS Pro 2.8.0 (https://support.esri.com/en/products/desktop/arcgis-desktop/ 
arcgis-pro/2-8) 
Distance to the nearest river 
km

Socio-economic factors   
Non-agricultural labor 
% 
Village head survey data in 2018. See Section S4 for more information in Supplementary Materials. 
Population 
Capita 
Yearbook data (NBSC, 2017)

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

5

2013). 
We used the parameter-free Kruskal-Wallis test to compare agro­
ecosystem (dis)services supply among the different village types. If the 
overall Kruskal-Wallis test was significant, comparisons between two 
village types were performed with Wilcoxon Rank Sum Tests. These 
parameter free tests do not assume any particular distribution for the 
data and do not require a normality assumption. The mean scores of the 
agroecosystem services and dis-services were plotted as bubble plots 
using the package ‘ggplot2’ (Wickham et al., 2016) in R (R Core Team, 
2021). 
A recoding of indicators was done for the RDA and Kruskal-Wallis 
analysis. In the case of natural enemies (frogs, ground beetles, lady­
beetles), water sufficiency (river water, deep well water and shallow 
well water), semi-natural habitats, and dis-services to agriculture, we 
treated the “No occurrence” or “Not applicable” responses as a true zero 
observation (no presence of this service or disservice). Furthermore, for 
disservices to or from agriculture, if respondents provided a score, we 
recoded the Likert scores 1–5 into a single rating of 1 (dis-service pre­
sent). See Table S1 in Supplementary Materials for detailed scales after 
such recoding. If the farmers do not have any insect-pollinated crops, 
they were excluded from the analysis. If respondents gave a score of 
“Don’t know” (seen as the true missing value) in the cases of cultural 
services, soil moisture, air quality and temperature change (in total 2% 
of the respondents), we used for the RDA and Kruskal-Wallis analysis the 
village average as a response for these respondents, assuring that in 
these cases the response would not affect the calculated mean (Roth, 
1994).

3. Results

3.1. Provisioning ecosystem services

The agricultural landscape of Quzhou is dominated by five crop 
types: cereals (mostly winter wheat, Triticum aestivum, spring and 
summer maize, Zea mays), vegetables (cabbage, Brassica oleracea var. 
Capitata, chillis, Capsicum frutescens, etc.), fruit trees (apple, Malus 
domestica, pear, Pyrus L., etc.), sugar crops (Stevia, Stevia rebaudiana), 
and fiber crops (cotton, Gossypium hirsutum). Vegetables and fruit trees 
had the highest average annual revenue, of 73,000 and 87,700 CNY per 
ha, respectively, although the variation was large (Table 2). More than 
half of the respondents perceived a reduction (scored as ‘weak decline’ 
or ‘strong decline’ in Table 2) in the revenue from fiber and sugar crops 
over the last 5 years, while fruit trees and vegetables were considered by 
most farmers to have become more remunerative.

3.2. Regulating ecosystem services

Most participants were aware of the state of regulating services and 
the changes therein (Fig. 3 c and d). Between 51% and 79% of the 
participants scored the presence of natural enemies (ladybugs, frogs, 
ground beetles) as ‘low’ to ‘very low’ (Fig. 3a), and 61–75% of the re­
spondents perceived a ‘weak decline’ or ‘strong decline’ in the numbers 
of these organisms in the period 2015 to 2020 (Fig. 3b). Most farmers 
(64%) scored the soil moisture condition as ‘poor’ to ‘very poor’, but

47% observed an improvement from 2015 to 2020 (Fig. 3). Half of the 
farmers were planting insect-pollinated crops (Fig. 3c), and forty percent 
of them thought the effectiveness of pollination was ‘poor’ to ‘very poor’ 
(Fig. 3a). Forty-seven percent of the respondents perceived an increase 
in temperature from 2015 to 2020 (Fig. 3a). More than 80% of the 
people assessed the air quality as good and improving (Fig. 3). In sum, 
some services were provided at an adequate level (air quality) while 
others were low (frogs, ground beetles, ladybugs, and soil moisture) 
while some were intermediate (pollination). Frogs, ladybugs, and 
ground beetles showed a declining trend, while air quality and soil 
moisture were improving, and pollination was stable. As a robustness 
check, we analyzed our data also with only smallholder farmers 
(excluding village heads and leader farmers) and obtained very similar 
patterns (see Fig. S5). However, village heads had on average higher 
ratings than the other interviewees for pollination (Table S5).

3.3. Supporting ecosystem services

The scorings provided by the participants indicate a shortage of 
supporting ecosystem services (Fig. 4). A minority of the participants 
indicated that natural habitats (windbreaks, wildflowers, hedgerows, 
field islets, diversified cropping, and ditches) were present in their vil­
lages (Fig. 4c). Where these elements were present, less than half of the 
respondents thought the presence of natural habitats was abundant as 
indicated with a score of ‘high’ or ‘very high’ (Fig. 4a). The abundance of 
earthworms, as an indicator of soil fertility and biodiversity, was 
perceived as ‘low’ or ‘very low’ by 64% of participants (Fig. 4a), and 
more than half of the participants thought the number of earthworms 
showed a ‘weak decline’ or ‘strong decline’ between 2015 and 2020 
(Fig. 4b). More than half of the participants perceived a declining 
groundwater sufficiency (both in shallow wells and deep wells) between 
2015 and 2020 providing a score of ‘decline’ or ‘strong decline’. On the 
other hand, fifty-nine percent of the participants perceived an 
improvement in the river water supply, by scoring either ‘weak increase’ 
or ‘strong increase’ (Fig. 4b). Thus, the state of half of the supporting 
services (length of hedgerows, earthworms, windbreaks, diversified 
cropping systems, wild flowers) was rated by the majority of re­
spondents as low or very low, but only three services were rated by a 
majority as declining (earthworms, and deep and shallow wells) while 
for other services no strong tendency to decline was indicated. The re­
sults are mostly similar across different farmer groups, though small­
holders tend to report less sufficient river waters, fewer diversified 
cropping systems, and less rich field islets than leader farmers and 
village heads while village head gave higher scores of those services (see 
Table S5).

3.4. Cultural ecosystem services

Most participants (58%) perceived the beauty of the landscape as a 
cultural service and 44% scored the suitability for agrotourism as ‘good’ 
to ‘very good’ (Fig. 5a). Improvements in these cultural services 
occurred in the years 2015–2020, as 63% and 66% of the respondents 
scored ‘increased’ or ‘strongly increased’ for these indicators (Fig. 5b). 
The involvement in science and education was rated as ‘low’ to ‘very

Table 2 
Provisioning services supply expressed in revenue of different crop types in 2020 and perceived trend in revenue between 2015 and 2020.

Crop Types 
Crop revenue (Unit: 103 CNY/ha, 1 CNY ≈0.15 USD) 
Trend of crop revenue from 2015 to 2020 (Percentage of the respondents)

Na 
Mean (±sd) 
Range 
Strong decline 
Weak decline 
Stable 
Weak increase 
Strong increase

Cereals 
459 
17.7 (±5.6) 
5.3–97.0 
7.2% 
19.2% 
30.7% 
32.7% 
10.2% 
Fiber crops 
140 
23.3 (±6.4) 
0.2–47.9 
22.9% 
40.7% 
17.1% 
15.7% 
3.6% 
Vegetables 
128 
73.0 (±75.4) 
3.6–450.0 
7.8% 
17.2% 
19.5% 
36.7% 
18.8% 
Sugar crops 
36 
37.1 (±14.9) 
13.5–66.8 
30.6% 
22.2% 
16.7% 
19.4% 
11.1% 
Fruit trees 
19 
87.7 (±52.2) 
9.1–150.0 
10.5% 
10.5% 
15.8% 
47.4% 
15.8%

a N is the number of records for each crop type.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

6

low’ by 79% of the participants (Fig. 5a), but 33% mentioned 
improvement in this (Fig. 5b). Awareness about cultural services was 
relatively high (Fig. 5 c and d). The beauty of the landscape and scien­
tific value was rated significantly lower for smallholders compared to 
village heads and leader farmers (see Table S5).

3.5. Dis-services

Two types of dis-services were distinguished: dis-services that affect 
agricultural production (natural hazards and salinization), and dis- 
services generated by agricultural production (eutrophication, water 
pollution, and air pollution). The latter were observed by only 14–22% 
of the farmers (Fig. 6c), and if these were observed, the severity was 
considered to be mostly ‘mild’ or ‘very mild’ (Fig. 6a). Natural hazards 
(except hail) were reported to have caused yield damage according to 
more than 40% of the participants (Fig. 6c). Sixty-three percent of the 
participants claimed that waterlogging was severe or very severe and 
fifty-six percent rated salinization as severe or very severe (Fig. 6a). Pest 
damage was not considered to be problematic with 83% of participants 
scoring ‘mild’ or ‘very mild’ effects. Most respondents (ranging from 
54% for water logging to 93% for pest damage scoring ‘strong decline’, 
‘decline’ or ‘no change’) indicated that impacts of natural hazards to 
agriculture did not become worse from 2015 to 2020 (Fig. 6b). Three of 
the most serious natural hazards indicated by respondents were thus 
related to extreme weather (waterlogging, heat and drought) while 
salinization was also frequently indicated. Ratings for trend indicate that 
there are more dis-services with an improving trend than dis-services 
with a trend towards more serious dis-service. Smallholders were less

likely to report air pollution and salinization than village heads and 
leader farmers while village heads had higher scores for those dis- 
services. The village heads also had overall lower scores for several 
dis-services of natural hazards, such as coldness, drought, dry-hot wind 
(see Table S5).

3.6. The relations between agroecosystem (dis)services supply and 
explanatory factors

We used RDA to assess associations between village characteristics 
and the supply of agroecosystem services and dis-services. The associ­
ations between the agroecosystem (dis)services supply and explanatory 
factors were significant (p-value <0.001) in permutation tests, and 21% 
of the total variance in agroecosystem (dis)services supply was 
explained by the selected explanatory factors (Fig. 7). Among all the 
variables, the crop area proportion (Vegetables, Fiber crops, Sugar 
crops, Fruit trees) and distance to the city center (Distance to city) had 
the most impact on agroecosystem (dis)services supply. 
The first axis of the RDA explained 11.7% of the variance (Fig. 7) and 
was positively correlated with the area proportion of cotton (Fiber 
crops) but negatively correlated with the area proportion of vegetables. 
Areas with more vegetables were closer to the city center and rivers 
(Distance to city, Distance to rivers). The area proportion of vegetables 
(Vegetables) was positively correlated with higher fertilizer and pesti­
cide application (variables N_input and TFI), higher soil organic matter 
content (SOM), and electrical conductivity (EC) and it had a positive 
relation with some of the provisioning services, supporting and regu­
lating services (Revenue, Earthworms, Pollination, and Shallow well

Fig. 3. Perceived supply in 2020 (Fig. 3a) and changes in supply between 2015 and 2020 (Fig. 3b) of regulating ecosystem services. Results in panels a and b are for 
the respondents who provided a scoring, while panels c and d present the percentage of respondents not providing a scoring. Note: 49% of farmers did not have 
insect-pollinated crops and hence did not provide a score for pollination effectiveness. See Table S1 in supplementary material for further information about the 
indicators used in the questionnaire.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

7

water) (Fig. 7). These features were negatively correlated with the area 
proportion of cotton (Fiber crops). In addition, the area percentage of 
cotton is also positively related to greater severity of dis-services (Pests,

Drought, etc.). 
The second axis of the RDA explained 9.4% of the variance (Fig. 7) 
and was negatively related to the area ratio of Stevia (Sugar crops) and

Fig. 4. Perceived supply in 2020 (Fig. 4a) and changes in supply between 2015 and 2020 (Fig. 4b) of supporting ecosystem services. Results in panels a and b are for 
the respondents who provided a scoring, while panels c and d present the percentage of respondents not providing a scoring. “Not applicable” denotes the absence of 
specific ecosystem services in village or farm level. For example, some of the villages had no rivers nearby or the farmers did not use certain water resources 
for irrigation.

Fig. 5. Perceived supply in 2020 (Fig. 5a) and changes in supply between 2015 and 2020 (Fig. 5b) of cultural ecosystem services. Results in panels a and b are for the 
respondents who provided a scoring, while panels c and d present the percentage of respondents not providing a scoring.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

8

fruit trees (Fruit trees), which were grown in areas with relatively low 
population (Population) and closer to the city center (Distance to city). 
These less diversified cropping systems (negative correlation with var­
iable ‘Diversified cropping system’) had high cultural value (Tourism), 
despite signs of dis-services of water and air pollution (Fig. 7).

3.7. Differences in agroecosystem (dis)services supply among village types

Village types are mainly different in landscape composition, i.e., the 
area proportion of different crop types (Table S3). Villages with wide­
spread vegetable cultivation (Village type 5) had generally better pro­
visioning services (Revenue), regulating services (Ladybugs, etc.), and 
supporting services (Earthworms, etc.). Villages with widespread cotton 
cultivation (Village type 6), had relatively lower services deliveries 
especially cultural services (Fig. 8a), but higher dis-services like hail 
damage (Fig. 8b). The delivery of agroecosystem services was close to 
average in village types with widespread cereal cultivation (Village 
types 3 and 4) (Fig. 8a). Farmers in village type 4 reported few natural 
habitats (Ditches and Field islets) and ladybugs (Fig. 8a), but more dis- 
services to agriculture (Wind) and more dis-services from agriculture 
(Water pollution) (Fig. 8b). In the diversified village type 7, dis-services 
were lower than in other village types (Fig. 8b).

4. Discussion

Farmers in Quzhou County perceived that regulating and supporting 
services were in poor condition or declining due to groundwater 
depletion, scarcity of natural habitats and loss of natural enemies, but 
they did not think pests were serious (Fig. 3, Figs. 4 and 6). Dis-services 
generated by agricultural production were observed by only few farmers 
(Fig. 6). We investigated the relationship between perceived agro­
ecosystem (dis)services and biophysical and socioeconomic conditions 
in villages, and found that the perceived agroecosystem (dis)services 
supply was associated with cultivated crop types and the distance to the 
city center (Fig. 7). Among different village types in Quzhou, the villages 
with a large proportion of fiber crops (cotton) had the worst perfor­
mance in terms of agroecosystem (dis)services supply among the village 
types, while the villages with more vegetable production performed 
better (Fig. 8).

4.1. What can be learnt from farmers’ perception of agroecosystem (dis) 
services?

Farmers in Quzhou county perceived a scarcity or a decline of 
regulating and supporting services. Consistent with previous studies, the 
farmers participating in this study acknowledged several issues, 
including ground water depletion (Zhao et al., 2019), climate warming 
and heat stress (Chen and Whalen, 2016; Wu et al., 2021), a scarcity of

Fig. 6. Perceived damage level in 2020 (Fig. 6a) and changes in the damage between 2015 and 2020 (Fig. 6b) of ecosystem dis-services. Results in panels a and b are 
for the respondents who provided a scoring, while panels c and d present the percentage of respondents not providing a scoring. “No awareness” means that the dis- 
services are not easily visible, and the respondents may not be aware of them. “No occurrence” means that the respondents were able to observe the dis-service but 
did not observe it.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

9

natural habitats (Li, 2014) and loss of biodiversity in the simplified 
agricultural landscape (Liu et al., 2006, 2010). 
Although the input of pesticides has been decreased by 35% and 
fertilizer was reduced by 9% from 2015 to 2020 in Quzhou County 
(NBSC, 2015–2020) under the “Zero Growth of Chemical Fertilizer and 
Pesticide Use Policy” that started in 2015 (Jin and Zhou, 2018), farmers 
still perceived a decline in the presence of natural enemies during this 
period. However, the actual dynamics between pests and natural en­
emies and the effects of (scarcity of) natural habitats would be hard to 
predict for farmers (W. Zhang et al., 2016). Stronger reductions in 
chemical inputs and the frequency and severity of mechanical opera­
tions (Bianchi, 2022) and the development of semi-natural habitats 
(Ricci et al., 2019) may be required to turn the agricultural landscape 
into “source habitats” for natural enemies (Dreyer and Gratton, 2014) to 
provide more effective pest control. 
Tombs in traditional croplands can serve as less-disturbed habitat 
islets that could act as hotspots of biodiversity in the agricultural land­
scape of Quzhou (Li, 2014). They can function as refuges to host

farmland organisms and potentially natural enemies (Li, 2014; Xiao, 
2014). The tombs hamper mechanical operations but have an important 
cultural value. Farmers indicated that removing the tombs from the 
fields for the purpose of land consolidation would cause resistance and 
resentment among farmers, especially among older people. This in­
dicates the importance of considering the cultural values embedded in 
agricultural landscapes in the assessment and planning of landscape 
changes. 
A striking result is the reported absence of dis-services from agri­
cultural production. Most farmers reported to be unaware that overuse 
of agronomic inputs could cause ecosystem dis-services like air and 
water pollution. However, other research conducted in Quzhou county 
reveals that more than half of the farmers in the case study area 
extensively used pesticides, particularly in vegetables and orchards 
production (Mu et al., 2022a). This widespread pesticide usage led to 
health risks for farmers due to the presence of pesticides in indoor dust, 
which can be considered as a form of dis-service (Mu et al., 2022b). So 
why are dis-services reported to be so low? Three potential explanations

Fig. 7. Redundancy analysis of associations of village characteristics and the provisioning of agroecosystem services and dis-services. Dots with different colors 
represent different categories of agroecosystem services and dis-services. Lines with labels represent explanatory variables (Village characteristics. Definitions of each 
variable can be found in Table 1). Longer vectors indicate that a variable more strongly drives the variation of agroecosystem (dis)services among the villages. Angles 
between variables reflect their correlation (line to line, line to dot, and dot to dot) (Borcard et al., 2011). Lines or dots pointing in the same directions have a positive 
relationship.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

10

Fig. 8. Differences in ecosystem services (a) and dis-services (b) among village types. Village type 1 had relatively widespread fruit trees and was nearest to the city 
center. Village type 2 had more widespread cultivation of sugar crops. Land use in village type 3 was dominated by cereals and this village had high population 
density. Village type 4 was also cereal dominated. Village type 5 was vegetable dominated. Village type 6 had a large area proportion of cotton and was furthest to the 
city center. Village type 7 was relatively diversified. See Table S4 in supplementary material for additional information.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

11

come to mind. First, many ecosystem (dis)services are difficult to 
observe even for knowledgeable and experienced observers (Lima and 
Bastos, 2019), so farmers are simply unable to perceive and interpret 
them (cf. Pan et al., 2021). Input suppliers were important sources of 
information of agricultural inputs application for farmers in the absence 
of a local extension system (Jin et al., 2015). However, those suppliers 
may not be able or willing to fully inform the farmers about the potential 
harm of chemical inputs, and some of them may amplify the recom­
mended amount of pesticide use to gain profit or trust (Zhang et al., 
2015). Second, many farmers in our survey attributed pollution to in­
dustrial and household waste, suggesting that farmers may not want to 
perceive or may not want to admit their contribution to environmental 
problems. A well-known caveat of self-reported assessment is that re­
spondents tend to give socially desirable answers and/or show 
self-deception (Milfont, 2009). There could also be strategic motives 
involved to keep problems ‘under the rug’, for example anticipation of 
stricter regulation. Third, we may also observe a ‘shifting baseline syn­
drome’ (Soga and Gaston, 2018) where farmers are over time exposed to 
increasing levels of pesticides, and those levels are then perceived to be 
perfectly normal and seen as benign. Our research was not designed to 
disentangle or test the relevance of these three channels, but investi­
gating the mechanisms and motives of underreporting of dis-services is 
certainly a fruitful avenue for further research.

4.2. Agroecosystem (dis)services and village characteristics

Previous studies have considered the effect of landscape features on 
the perceptions of ecosystem services, for example, non-crop habitats 
(Zhang et al., 2018), forest and agroforest (Muhamad et al., 2014), and 
multiple natural and semi-natural landscapes (Zoderer et al., 2019). In 
the context of agricultural landscapes, we are not aware of any research 
on the relations between people’s perceptions and landscape composi­
tion. This study provides evidence that the crop type composition in 
landscapes is strongly associated with farmers’ perception of agro­
ecosystem (dis)services (Fig. 7). Socioeconomic and demographic fac­
tors also determine the ecosystem (dis)services and the perceptions, e.g., 
location advantages (Zhang et al., 2021), population density (Fei et al., 
2016), and type of stakeholders (Bernues et al., 2016). Similar to pre­
vious studies (Wang et al., 2021), we also found that the distance to the 
city is associated with agroecosystem (dis)services delivery. 
Villages with predominantly market-oriented crops (vegetables, 
fruits, Stevia) and located closer to the city center tended to have better 
soil and availability of irrigation. These advantages and the vicinity of 
markets provide those villages more options to develop cash crop pro­
duction. Agrotourism also benefits villages with more fruit orchards and 
near cities by increasing their profit through activities like fruit-picking 
or flower-viewing. Previous studies indicated that excessive amounts of 
pesticide were used in vegetables and orchards production in Quzhou, 
which imperiled the pollinators (Mu et al., 2022a). Our survey was 
designed to measure farmers’ assessment of insect pollination services 
provided by naturally occurring insects and managed honeybees. The 
results showed the farmers in these vegetable-dominated villages 
perceived effective pollination. From our field visits, we know that 
farmers in these villages may nevertheless use hand pollination (e.g., in 
melons) indicating that they still invest in measures to assure their yield. 
Such pollination measures require additional input and investment 
compared to natural insect-induced pollination, and assessing the so­
cioeconomic impacts of those seems like a natural avenue for further 
research. 
Remote villages tend to utilize a larger proportion of the area for 
cotton cultivation, which may result from the fallow policy that was 
introduced in 2015. The government encouraged farmers to grow single 
season cotton instead of winter wheat-summer maize double cropping to 
reduce groundwater depletion. Farmers adopting fallow policies 
received subsidy equivalent to the profit of one season grain production. 
Despite the extensification of land-use due to the following, which is

expected to deliver more services (e.g., save more underground water), 
these farmers perceived more dis-services compared to beneficial 
services.

4.3. Limitations and outlook

Perception-based evaluation can be an effective scanning tool to 
elucidate locally relevant constraints, challenges and patterns of obser­
vations and beliefs regarding agroecosystem (dis)services (Chen et al., 
2018; Smith and Sullivan, 2014). The survey-based assessment of 
agroecosystem (dis)services could be used to rapidly identify issues and 
challenges experienced by stakeholders in relation to agricultural pro­
duction in a bottom-up approach (Dawoe et al., 2012), but there are 
important caveats. Perceptions are inherently subjective and dependent 
on the respondents’ ability and willingness to acknowledge problems 
(Bennett, 2016). In addition, multiple factors like visibility of (dis)ser­
vices, knowledge, experience, biophysical environment, personality 
traits, demographic characteristics, etc. also make the interpretation of 
perception-based agroecosystem (dis)services assessment complex 
(Chen et al., 2018; Lima and Bastos, 2019; Martín-L´opez et al., 2012; 
Zhang et al., 2018; Zoderer et al., 2019). Knowing to what extent 
stakeholders can precisely characterize the real agroecosystem (dis) 
services and their trend over time is challenging. The results from 
perception-based evaluation of agroecosystem (dis)services can provide 
valuable bottom to up information, but policymakers should always be 
mindful of their limitations. 
Quzhou is a representative county in the North China Plain, but 
perception-based evaluation is still context-dependent. As Quzhou 
became a test area for China’s policy for Agriculture Green Development 
in 2020, the perception of ecosystem services in this area could change 
with time. Therefore, quantitative assessment with measurable (proxy) 
indicators is needed. Survey-based assessments are most valuable when 
complementing – rather than substituting – an indicator–cased bio­
physical assessment. The interpretation of our study results is to some 
extent constrained by the absence of ground-truthing data. Nevertheless, 
the current survey results set a useful baseline for future monitoring and 
measurement programs, and for evaluating the temporal development 
of stakeholder perceptions. 
There are several important considerations to bear in mind when 
comparing perceptions with biophysical assessment through ground- 
truthing in future research. Firstly, relying solely on biophysical evalu­
ations may not adequately capture the subjective cognitions and expe­
riences of individuals concerning cultural services. Secondly, 
respondents may not fully align their understanding of certain (dis) 
services with the definitions used in biophysical assessment. Thirdly, 
some (dis)services, such as air pollution, are invisible and require a 
theoretical understanding to fully comprehend their impact. In such 
cases of people’s non-recognition of certain (dis)services, ground- 
truthing can yield more reliable results. In conclusion, the process of 
ground-truthing holds value for verifying perceptions of agroecosystem 
(dis)services. However, it is crucial to approach ground-truthing with 
careful consideration of the unique characteristics of each (dis)service 
and to be mindful of potential reasons for discrepancies between peo­
ple’s perceptions and biophysical assessments. By addressing these 
factors during ground-truthing, researchers can obtain more reliable and 
comprehensive insights into the true nature of agroecosystem (dis) 
services. 
The results in this study are based on a sample of interviewees 
consisting of 187 smallholder farmers, 35 village heads and 45 leader 
farmers. We interviewed all the village heads in the sample of 35 vil­
lages, all the leader farmers that could be reached, and a proportion of 
the smallholders accounting for 100–800 households per village. Results 
presented are for the pooled data, but some differences between the 
three groups of interviewees were identified (Table S5). We chose to 
analyze the pooled data of the whole sample because on the whole, the 
three farmer groups of interviewees gave scores that are consistent in the

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

12

sense that they would qualify as low, medium or high across all the 
groups, even in the cases in which significant differences between the 
groups were detected (Table S5). While these differences are acknowl­
edged, the analysis of this paper is not focused on comparing different 
stakeholders but on an overall assessment of ecosystem services provi­
sioning in the study area. For an assessment, the point of view of leader 
farmers and village heads cannot be ignored because they are generally 
well informed on the local situation and in any future societal discourse, 
such stakeholder will tend to have a voice. Overall, the ratings of 
smallholders (187 interviewees out of a total of 267 interviewees; 70%) 
still determine to a large extent the overall outcome of the survey. 
Supplementary material provides Figs. S5–S8, based on the smallholders 
only, showing broadly the same patterns as those represented in the 
main text, so the conclusions drawn are robust to this selection of the 
sample. 
The redundancy analysis (RDA) explained only a small proportion of 
the variance in this study. RDA can only reveal linear relationships be­
tween explanatory factors and agroecosystem (dis)services, while for the 
ecological processes underlying agroecosystem (dis)services provision­
ing non-linear relations could be expected. Therefore, the RDA cannot 
address the complex nature of the socio-ecological systems and pro­
cesses occurring at multiple temporal-spatial scales. Nevertheless, RDA 
can still give an impression of the direction of relations since it captures 
the key factors that influence the agroecosystem (dis)services and allows 
to visualize the relationship among the variables. The robustness of the 
relationships needs to be further tested at multiple temporal and spatial 
scales. 
The village-based analysis suggests that agroecosystem (dis)services 
are context-specific and should therefore be linked to socioeconomic 
and biophysical factors that are likely to vary between villages in the 
same county or city. Accordingly, Chinese government policy proposed 
in 2019 encourages using a village typology for rural planning and 
development (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 2019). More­
over, participation of farmers and other local actors in the planning and 
development process is stimulated. In that sense, the farmers’ perception 
of agroecosystem (dis)services could be embedded within these wider 
policy development processes. This would create an interface between 
the top-down and bottom-up planning approaches which can help to 
make policy implementation more effective (Martínez-Sastre et al., 
2020; Pradhan et al., 2017). Farmers could benefit from their involve­
ment as they would receive more professional knowledge, information, 
and guidance for nature-positive farming practices. This could be com­
bined with existing interface platforms like the science and technology 
backyards (STBs), which support agricultural innovation within villages 
(J. Li et al., 2022).

5. Conclusions

Here we describe the current state and recent trends in agro­
ecosystem services and dis-services perceived by farmers in the simpli­
fied agricultural landscapes of Quzhou county in the North China Plain. 
The study shows that while Quzhou exhibits relatively good provision­
ing services, farmers perceived a scarcity and vulnerability of regulating 
and supporting services and had limited awareness of dis-services. The 
lack of awareness of dis-services is surprising, as several dis-services 
have been documented on the basis of quantitative measurements in 
other studies. This suggests that farmers’ perception can complement 
but not substitute agroecosystem services assessments based on bio­
physical quantification. The farmers’ perception can be used to effec­
tively search for the knowledge gaps of ecosystem services assessment 
and where extension and awareness raising are needed. Verification of 
farmers’ perceptions by ground-truthing could further contribute to 
having a baseline for monitoring the progress of ‘Agriculture Green 
Development’ in the future. The findings of the relations between 
perceived supply and village characteristics emphasize the need for 
targeted interventions and policies to enhance agroecosystem service

provision at the village scale. Stimulating nature-positive farm practices 
and improving the agroecosystem services requires consideration of 
specific socioecological conditions of different villages and engagement 
of different stakeholder groups.

Credit author statement

Jiali Cheng: Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Visuali­
zation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Zhan Xu: 
Data curation, Formal analysis. Zhengyuan Liang: Investigation, Data 
curation. Fan Li: Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing. 
Wen-Feng Cong: Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Funding 
acquisition. Chaochun Zhang: Supervision, Resources. Lei Song: Inves­
tigation, Resources. Chong Wang: Data curation, Resources. Fusuo 
Zhang: Supervision, Resources, Project administration. Andries Richter: 
Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Wopke van der Werf: 
Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Jeroen C.J. 
Groot: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgment

We acknowledge colleagues who participated in the survey and data 
entry. This study was financially supported by the National Key 
Research and Development Program of China (2022YFD1900200), 
Hainan University, the Program of Advanced Discipline Construction in 
Beijing (Agriculture Green Development), China Scholarship Council 
(No. 201913043), and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 
Universities of Huazhong Agricultural University (2662022JGQD002).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.119060.

References

Bennett, N.J., 2016. Using perceptions as evidence to improve conservation and 
environmental management. Conserv. Biol. 30, 582–592. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
cobi.12681. 
Bernues, A., Tello-Garcia, E., Rodriguez-Ortega, T., Ripoll-Bosch, R., Casasus, I., 2016. 
Agricultural practices, ecosystem services and sustainability in High Nature Value 
farmland: unraveling the perceptions of farmers and nonfarmers. Land Use Pol. 59, 
130–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.08.033. 
Bianchi, F.J.J.A., 2022. From pattern to process: towards mechanistic design principles 
for pest suppressive landscapes. Basic Appl. Ecol. 64, 157–171. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.baae.2022.09.002. 
Borcard, D., Gillet, François, Legendre, P., 2011. Canonical ordination. In: Borcard, D., 
Gillet, Francois, Legendre, P. (Eds.), Numerical Ecology with R, Use R. Springer, New 
York, NY, pp. 153–225. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-7976-6_6. 
Bryer, J., Speerschneider, K., Bryer, M.J., 2016. Package ‘likert.’ Likert: analysis and 
visualization Likert items (1.3. 5. Available online at: https://CRAN. R-project. 
org/package= likert. accessed April 6th, 2023).  
Cao, Y., Cao, Y., Li, G., Tian, Y., Fang, X., Li, Y., Tan, Y., 2020. Linking ecosystem services 
trade-offs, bundles and hotspot identification with cropland management in the 
coastal Hangzhou Bay area of China. Land Use Pol. 97, 104689. 
Chen, D., Whalen, J.K., 2016. Climate change in the North China plain: smallholder 
farmer perceptions and adaptations in Quzhou county, Hebei province. Clim. Res. 
69, 261–273. https://doi.org/10.3354/cr01407. 
Chen, Y., Yu, Z., Li, X., Li, P., 2018. How agricultural multiple ecosystem services 
respond to socioeconomic factors in Mengyin County, China. Sci. Total Environ. 630, 
1003–1015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.02.187.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

13

Chen, Y., Zhang, Q., Liu, W., Yu, Z., 2017. Analyzing farmers’ perceptions of ecosystem 
services and PES schemes within agricultural landscapes in Mengyin county, China: 
transforming trade-offs into synergies. Sustainability 9, 1459. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/su9081459. 
Cui, J., Sui, P., Wright, D.L., Wang, D., Yang, J., Lv, Z., Chen, Y., 2021. A revised 
integrated framework to evaluate the sustainability of given cropping systems. 
J. Clean. Prod. 289, 125716 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125716. 
Dawoe, E.K., Quashie-Sam, J., Isaac, M.E., Oppong, S.K., 2012. Exploring farmers’ local 
knowledge and perceptions of soil fertility and management in the Ashanti Region of 
Ghana, 180 Geoderma 179, 96–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
geoderma.2012.02.015. 
DeClerck, F., Jones, S., Attwood, S., Bossio, D., Girvetz, E., Chaplin-Kramer, B., Enfors, E., 
Fremier, A., Gordon, L., Kizito, F., Lopez Noriega, I., Matthews, N., McCartney, M., 
Meacham, M., Noble, A., Quintero, M., Remans, R., Soppe, R., Willemen, L., 
Wood, S., Zhang, W., 2016. Agricultural ecosystems and their services: the vanguard 
of sustainability? Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain., Open Issue, part I 23, 92–99. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2016.11.016. 
de Groot, R.S., Alkemade, R., Braat, L., Hein, L., Willemen, L., 2010. Challenges in 
integrating the concept of ecosystem services and values in landscape planning, 
management and decision making. Ecol. Complex. 7, 260–272. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ecocom.2009.10.006. 
de Groot, R.S., Wilson, M.A., Boumans, R.M.J., 2002. A typology for the classification, 
description and valuation of ecosystem functions, goods and services. Ecol. Econ. 41, 
393–408. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(02)00089-7. 
de Snoo, G.R., Herzon, I., Staats, H., Burton, R.J.F., Schindler, S., van Dijk, J., 
Lokhorst, A.M., Bullock, J.M., Lobley, M., Wrbka, T., Schwarz, G., Musters, C.J.M., 
2013. Toward effective nature conservation on farmland: making farmers matter. 
Conserv. Lett. 6, 66–72. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-263X.2012.00296.x. 
Domon, G., 2011. Landscape as resource: consequences, challenges and opportunities for 
rural development. Landsc. Urban Plann. 100, 338–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
landurbplan.2011.02.014. 
Dreyer, J., Gratton, C., 2014. Habitat linkages in conservation biological control: lessons 
from the land–water interface. Biol. Control 75, 68–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biocontrol.2013.11.006. 
Fei, L., Shuwen, Z., Jiuchun, Y., Kun, B., Qing, W., Junmei, T., Liping, C., 2016. The 
effects of population density changes on ecosystem services value: a case study in 
Western Jilin, China. Ecol. Indicat. 61, 328–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecolind.2015.09.033. 
Jin, S., Bluemling, B., Mol, A.P.J., 2015. Information, trust and pesticide overuse: 
interactions between retailers and cotton farmers in China. NJAS - Wageningen J. 
Life Sci. 72–73, 23–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2014.10.003. 
Jin, S., Zhou, F., 2018. Zero growth of chemical fertilizer and pesticide use: China’s 
objectives, progress and challenges. J. Resour. Ecol. 9, 50–58. https://doi.org/ 
10.5814/j.issn.1674-764x.2018.01.006. 
Li, J., Leeuwis, C., Heerink, N., Zhang, W., 2022a. The science and technology backyard 
as a local level innovation intermediary in rural China. Front. Agric. Sci. Eng. 9, 
558–576. https://doi.org/10.15302/J-FASE-2022465. 
Li, K., Wang, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Jiang, R., Feng, G., Liu, X., Zuo, Y., Yuan, H., 
Zhang, C., Gai, J., Tian, J., Li, H., Sun, Y., Yu, B., 2022b. Evaluating the effects of 
agricultural inputs on the soil quality of smallholdings using improved indices. 
Catena 209, 105838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2021.105838. 
Li, L., 2014. Distribution Pattern of Plant Diversity and Vegetation Construction in Field 
Margins and Home Gardens (PhD Thesis). China Agricultural University, Beijing.  
Liang, Z., van der Werf, W., Xu, Z., Cheng, J., Wang, C., Cong, W.-F., Zhang, C., Zhang, F., 
Groot, J.C.J., 2022. Identifying exemplary sustainable cropping systems using a 
positive deviance approach: wheat-maize double cropping in the North China Plain. 
Agric. Syst. 201, 103471 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103471. 
Lima, F.P., Bastos, R.P., 2019. Perceiving the invisible: Formal education affects the 
perception of ecosystem services provided by native areas. Ecosyst. Serv. 40, 101029 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2019.101029. 
Liu, Q., Sun, X., Wu, W., Liu, Z., Fang, G., Yang, P., 2022. Agroecosystem services: a 
review of concepts, indicators, assessment methods and future research perspectives. 
Ecol. Indicat. 142, 109218 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.109218. 
Liu, Y., Axmacher, J.C., Wang, C., Li, L., Yu, Z., 2010. Ground beetles (Coleoptera: 
Carabidae) in the intensively cultivated agricultural landscape of Northern China – 
implications for biodiversity conservation. Insect. Conserv. Divers. 3, 34–43. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-4598.2009.00069.x. 
Liu, Y., Yu, Z., Gu, W., Axmacher, J.C., 2006. Diversity of carabids (Coleoptera, 
Carabidae) in the desalinized agricultural landscape of Quzhou county, China. Agric. 
Ecosyst. Environ. 113, 45–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2005.08.035. 
Ma, F., Eneji, A.E., Liu, J., 2015. Assessment of ecosystem services and dis-services of an 
agro-ecosystem based on extended emergy framework: a case study of Luancheng 
county, North China. Ecol. Eng. 82, 241–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecoleng.2015.04.100. 
Martínez-Sastre, R., García, D., Mi˜narro, M., Martín-L´opez, B., 2020. Farmers’ 
perceptions and knowledge of natural enemies as providers of biological control in 
cider apple orchards. J. Environ. Manag. 266, 110589 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jenvman.2020.110589. 
Martín-L´opez, B., Iniesta-Arandia, I., García-Llorente, M., Palomo, I., Casado-Arzuaga, I., 
Amo, D.G.D., G´omez-Baggethun, E., Oteros-Rozas, E., Palacios-Agundez, I., 
Willaarts, B., Gonz´alez, J.A., Santos-Martín, F., Onaindia, M., L´opez-Santiago, C., 
Montes, C., 2012. Uncovering ecosystem service bundles through social preferences. 
PLoS One, e38970. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038970. 
MEA, 2005. Current State and Trends. Wash. DC.  
Meng, F., Wang, M., Strokal, M., Kroeze, C., Ma, L., Li, Y., Zhang, Q., Wei, Z., Hou, Y., 
Liu, X., Xu, W., Zhang, F., 2022. Nitrogen losses from food production in the North

China Plain: a case study for Quzhou. Sci. Total Environ. 816, 151557 https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151557. 
Milfont, T.L., 2009. The effects of social desirability on self-reported environmental 
attitudes and ecological behaviour. Environmentalist 29, 263–269. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10669-008-9192-2. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 2021. 14th Five-Year Plan" National 
Agricultural Green Development Plan. Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs.  
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 2019. Suggestions for Coordinating and 
Advancing Village Planning. Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. 
Mu, H., Wang, K., Yang, X., Xu, W., Liu, X., Ritsema, C.J., Geissen, V., 2022a. Pesticide 
usage practices and the exposure risk to pollinators: a case study in the North China 
Plain. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 241, 113713 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecoenv.2022.113713. 
Mu, H., Zhang, J., Yang, X., Wang, K., Xu, W., Zhang, H., Liu, X., Ritsema, C.J., 
Geissen, V., 2022b. Pesticide screening and health risk assessment of residential dust 
in a rural region of the North China Plain. Chemosphere 303, 135115. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2022.135115. 
Muhamad, D., Okubo, S., Harashina, K., Parikesit Gunawan, B., Takeuchi, K., 2014. 
Living close to forests enhances people’s perception of ecosystem services in a forest- 
agricultural landscape of West Java, Indonesia. Ecosyst. Serv. 8, 197–206. 
NBSC, 2019. China Statistical Yearbook 2019. China Statistics Press, Beijing.  
NBSC, 2015-2020. Handan City Statistical Yearbooks from 2015 to 2020. China Statistics 
Press, Beijing.  
NBSC, 2017. Quzhou County Statistical Yearbook of 2017. China Statistics Press, Beijing.  
Odum, H.T., 1996. Environmental Accounting: EMERGY and Environmental Decision 
Making. John Wiley, New York (USA.  
Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F.G., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., Minchin, P.R., O’hara, R.B., 
Simpson, G.L., Solymos, P., Stevens, M.H.H., Wagner, H., 2013. Package ‘vegan.’ 
Community ecol. Package Version 2, 1–295. 
Pan, Y., Ren, Y., Luning, P.A., 2021. Factors influencing Chinese farmers’ proper 
pesticide application in agricultural products – a review. Food Control 122, 107788. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2020.107788. 
Pradhan, N.S., Fu, Y., Zhang, L., Yang, Y., 2017. Farmers’ perception of effective drought 
policy implementation: a case study of 2009–2010 drought in Yunnan province, 
China. Land Use Pol. 67, 48–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.04.051. 
Quzhou County Government, 2020. The construction plan for the supporting system of 
Agricultural Green Development Zone of Quzhou County (2020-2022). Quzhou 
County Government, Quzhou.  
R Core Team, 2021. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL. https://www.R-project. 
org/.  
Roth, P.L., 1994. Missing data: a conceptual review for applied psychologists. Person. 
Psychol. 47, 537–560. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1994.tb01736.x. 
Ricci, B., Lavigne, C., Alignier, A., Aviron, S., Biju-Duval, L., Bouvier, J.C., Choisis, J.-P., 
Franck, P., Joannon, A., Ladet, S., Mezerette, F., Plantegenest, M., Savary, G., 
Thomas, C., Vialatte, A., Petit, S., 2019. Local pesticide use intensity conditions 
landscape effects on biological pest control. Proc. R. Soc. B-Biol. Sci. 286, 20182898 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2018.2898. 
Shen, J., Zhu, Q., Jiao, X., Ying, H., Wang, H., Wen, X., Xu, W., Li, T., Cong, W., Liu, X., 
Hou, Y., Cui, Z., Oenema, O., Davies, W.J., Zhang, F., 2020. Agriculture green 
development: a model for China and the world. Front. Agr. Sci. Eng. 7 (1), 5–13. 
https://doi.org/10.15302/J-FASE-2019300. 
Soga, M., Gaston, K.J., 2018. Shifting baseline syndrome: causes, consequences, and 
implications. Front. Ecol. Environ. 16, 222–230. https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1794. 
Smith, H.F., Sullivan, C.A., 2014. Ecosystem services within agricultural landscapes- 
Farmers’ perceptions. Ecol. Econ. 98, 72–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecolecon.2013.12.008. 
State Council, 2016. Central Document No. 1 of China. Central Committee and the State 
Council of the People’s Republic of China. 
UN General Assembly, 2015. Transforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. General Assembly, NY USA.  
Vrebos, D., Staes, J., Vandenbroucke, T., D׳Haeyer, T., Johnston, R., Muhumuza, M., 
Kasabeke, C., Meire, P., 2015. Mapping ecosystem service flows with land cover 
scoring maps for data-scarce regions. Ecosyst. Serv. 13, 28–40. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.11.005. 
Wang, J., Cao, Y., Fang, X., Li, G., Cao, Y., 2021. Identification of the trade-offs/synergies 
between rural landscape services in a spatially explicit way for sustainable rural 
development. J. Environ. Manag. 300, 113706 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jenvman.2021.113706. 
Wickham, H., Chang, W., Wickham, M.H., 2016. Package ‘ggplot2.’ Create elegant data 
visualisations using the grammar of graphics. Versiones 2, 1–189. 
Wu, X., Wang, L., Yao, R., Luo, M., Li, X., 2021. Identifying the dominant driving factors 
of heat waves in the North China Plain. Atmos. Res. 252, 105458 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.atmosres.2021.105458. 
Xiao, H., 2014. Evaluation and Planning Methods Research of Rural Ecological 
Landscape on Different Scales (PhD Thesis). China Agricultural University, Beijing.  
Yang, X., Wang, M., 2022. Diversification and spatial differentiation of villages’ 
functional types in the new period of China: results from Hierarchical urban-rural 
spatial relations and townships size. Land 11, 171. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
land11020171. 
Zhang, C., Hu, R., Shi, G., Jin, Y., Robson, M.G., Huang, X., 2015. Overuse or underuse? 
An observation of pesticide use in China. Sci. Total Environ. 538, 1–6. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.08.031. 
Zhang, G., Zheng, D., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Wu, H., Li, S., 2021. Mapping changes in the 
value of ecosystem services in the yangtze river middle reaches Megalopolis, China. 
Ecosyst. Serv. 48, 101252 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2021.101252.

J. Cheng et al.

Journal of Environmental Management 347 (2023) 119060

14

Zhang, W., Kato, E., Bhandary, P., Nkonya, E., Ibrahim, H.I., Agbonlahor, M., Ibrahim, H. 
Y., Cox, C., 2016. Awareness and perceptions of ecosystem services in relation to 
land use types: evidence from rural communities in Nigeria. Ecosyst. Serv. 22, 
150–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2016.10.011. 
Zhang, W., Kato, E., Bianchi, F., Bhandary, P., Gort, G., van der Werf, W., 2018. Farmers’ 
perceptions of crop pest severity in Nigeria are associated with landscape, agronomic 
and socio-economic factors. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 259, 159–167. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agee.2018.03.004. 
Zhang, W., Ricketts, T.H., Kremen, C., Carney, K., Swinton, S.M., 2007. Ecosystem 
services and dis-services to agriculture. Ecol. Econ. 64, 253–260. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.02.024. 
Zhang, X., Pei, D., Hu, C., 2003. Conserving groundwater for irrigation in the North 
China plain. Irrigat. Sci. 21, 159–166. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00271-002-0059-x.

Zhao, Q., Zhang, B., Yao, Y., Wu, W., Meng, G., Chen, Q., 2019. Geodetic and 
hydrological measurements reveal the recent acceleration of groundwater depletion 
in North China Plain. J. Hydrol. 575, 1065–1072. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhydrol.2019.06.016. 
Zhao, Y., Wang, L., Lei, X., Wang, B., Cui, J., Xu, Y., Chen, Y., Sui, P., 2021. Reducing 
carbon footprint without compromising grain security through relaxing cropping 
rotation system in the North China Plain. J. Clean. Prod. 318, 128465 https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128465. 
Zhou, S., Wu, J., Wang, G., 2017. Evaluation of agro-ecosystem services and analysis of 
irrigation benefit in the North China Plain. Chin. J. Eco-Agric. 25, 1360–1370. 
https://doi.org/10.13930/j.cnki.cjea.170203. 
Zoderer, B.M., Tasser, E., Carver, S., Tappeiner, U., 2019. Stakeholder perspectives on 
ecosystem service supply and ecosystem service demand bundles. Ecosyst. Serv. 37, 
100938 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2019.100938.

J. Cheng et al.