Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

Available online 22 February 2024
0308-521X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Comparing the sustainability of smallholder and business farms in the 
North China Plain; a case study in Quzhou

Zhan Xu a,b,c,*, Zhengyuan Liang a,b,c, Jiali Cheng a,b,c, Jeroen C.J. Groot b, Chaochun Zhang c,*, 
Wen-Feng Cong c, Fusuo Zhang c, Wopke van der Werf a

a Centre for Crop Systems Analysis Group, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands 
b Farming Systems Ecology Group, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands 
c State Key Laboratory of Nutrient Use and Management; College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China

H I G H L I G H T S  
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T

• Smallholder farming in China is being 
replaced by business farming, but con­
sequences for sustainability are not 
known. 
• We evaluate farm characteristics and 
crop management of smallholder and 
business farms on the North China Plain. 
• Smallholder farms had greater cereal 
production, 
while 
business 
farms 
focused on crops generating greater 
revenue. 
• Business farming resulted in improve­

ment of some environmental character­
istics, e.g. lower water use and N 
surplus. 
• Improved practices are needed to 
further enhance sustainability of both 
farm types.

A R T I C L E  I N F O

Editor: Kairsty Topp

Keywords: 
Business farm 
Smallholder farm 
Sustainability performance 
Crop allocation 
Cropping system

A B S T R A C T

CONTEXT: With labour migration to cities, Chinese agriculture is witnessing the emergence of business farming 
and an enlargement in farm sizes. Farm size enlargement triggers a wide range of managerial adjustments that 
may affect the sustainability of crop production practices. There is little empirical information on cropping 
practices and the sustainability of crop production of business farms as compared to traditional smallholder 
farms. 
OBJECTIVE: Here, we made a comparison of cropping activities and sustainability performances between 
smallholder farms and business farms. 
METHODS: Data on cropping activities and crop management were obtained by a survey among 486 smallholder 
farms and 19 business farms in 35 villages across Quzhou county on the North China Plain. After collecting data, 
we calculated sustainability indicators at the crop and farm scales. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Business farms were about 15 times as large as smallholder farms (14.6 ha versus 
0.8 ha) and they had more self-owned machinery. There was no significant difference in the number of crop 
species cultivated on smallholder or business farms. However, business farms allocated less area to grains and

* Corresponding authors at: Centre for Crop Systems Analysis Group, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, The Netherlands 
E-mail addresses: zhan.xu@wur.nl (Z. Xu), zhangcc@cau.edu.cn (C. Zhang).

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Agricultural Systems

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2024.103896 
Received 13 October 2023; Received in revised form 1 January 2024; Accepted 4 February 2024

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

2

more area to cash crops with high economic benefit, such as stevia and vegetables, than smallholder farms did. 
Business farms showed some environmental benefits, e.g., business farms used 21% less irrigation water and had 
28% lower N surplus. However, there were also trade-offs with business farms having 32% lower dietary energy 
output per unit area per year than smallholder farms. These differences were associated with better management 
and lower cropping index (number of crops per year) on business farms as compared to smallholder farms. These 
results indicate that business farms achieved improvements with respect to environmental externalities of 
agricultural production, when compared to smallholder farms, but the contribution to grain production was 
comparatively low. 
SIGNIFICANCE: This study shows that scale enlargement of farming in a Chinese context is no panacea for 
achieving improved crop production sustainability.

1. Introduction

With a growing world population, there is an increasing demand for 
food, but agriculture's negative environmental impacts need to be 
mitigated (Foley et al., 2011). Farm size is a key variable in discussions 
on food security, environmental externalities of agriculture and socio­
economic viability of farms (Meyfroidt, 2017). It is estimated that 
smallholder farms produce 40% of all global food production (Samberg 
et al., 2016), and it is thought that they will remain an essential source 
for food production and poverty eradication (Giller et al., 2021; Ric­
ciardi et al., 2021). However, to enhance and stabilize agricultural 
production there is a strong pressure to intensify, homogenize and scale 
up farming enterprises to benefit from economies of scale and to allow 
larger investments into ‘rationalization’ of the production process, for 
instance by mechanization (Woodhouse, 2010). Farm consolidation and 
size enlargement aims to enhance productivity, resource use efficiency 
and economic performance (Rada and Fuglie, 2019), but could also 
affect the diversity of production activities and the flexibility to adapt 
when faced with variability, change and disturbances (Koirala et al., 
2022). Farms of different sizes may make contrasting choices regarding 
management practices, such as chemical versus organic inputs or the 
intensity of use of inputs such as water, fertilizers and pesticides. This 
could strongly affect the environmental impact of farms (Ren et al., 
2019; Liebert et al., 2022). Several studies compare larger and small­
holder farms in some sustainability aspects, but much remains unknown 
about whether differences in farm size are associated with trade-offs 
among sustainability indicators. 
Some Asian areas are experiencing a growth in number of large 
business farms, where farm sizes have traditionally been small and la­
bour wages have been rising (Otsuka et al., 2016a). One of the best 
examples is China, which is home to almost 40% of the world's small­
holder farms (<2 ha per farm) (Huang et al., 2012). One of the reasons 
for the small farm size in China is the collective ownership of the land 
which is allocated to rural households on a pro rata basis, i.e., propor­
tional to the number of people in each household. With rising rural 
population, the average farm size has been falling in China, from 0.73 ha 
in 1985 to 0.61 ha in 2013 (Ji et al., 2016). It is very difficult to earn a 
living on these small farms, and younger people are hence moving to the 
cities where a higher wage can be obtained, thereby reducing labour 
availability in rural areas. Accordingly, there has not been enough la­
bour available for farming. As a result, there is a rapid emergence of 
business farms (>3 ha per farm) (Huang and Ding, 2016). Such farms are 
run by a manager, and she or he hires labour as needed. Business farms 
have a reduced requirement for labour by investment in equipment, 
which is not cost effective at the scale of smallholder farms. The Chinese 
government believes that consolidation, combining fragmented and 
scattered land parcels into larger and more cohesive units, will prevent 
cropland abandonment and promote agricultural mechanization (Shen 
and Shen, 2018). 
There are three types of business farms in China: family farms1,

cooperative farms2, and agricultural companies3 (see Appendix A1 for 
details). Approximately 60% of the people having land use rights work 
off-farm and rent out their cropland to one of these three types of 
business farms (Deininger et al., 2014). The Chinese government 
introduced several policies to speed up business farm establishment, 
including granting farmers the right to lease land, providing loan gua­
rantees, subsidizing investment in storage infrastructure, and providing 
direct subsidies for purchasing large machinery (Rada et al., 2015). It is 
timely to know to what extent the newly emerging business farms 
develop more sustainable practices than smallholders in China. 
The North China Plain (NCP) is a key agricultural production area in 
China, which is responsible for 59% of the national production of wheat, 
26% of maize, 7% of cotton and 29% of vegetables (National Bureau of 
Statistics of China (NBSC, 2020). High levels of agricultural input, such 
as fertilizers, pesticides and water, are used to support high and stable 
crop production (Ju et al., 2009; Niu et al., 2021). However, the 
intensive production methods have caused a series of sustainability is­
sues, such as high nitrogen (N) losses, pesticide contamination of surface 
water (Brauns et al., 2018), and overexploitation of shallow and deep 
groundwater resources (Holst et al., 2014). From 2003 to 2013, the 
cultivated land share by business farms increased by 30% in the NCP 
(NBSC, 2013), and the number of business farms in the NCP is expected 
to rise further (Duan et al., 2021). There is a need to elucidate to what 
extent business farms in the NCP contribute to solving the above sus­
tainability problems. 
Farmers select their crops on the basis of their production objectives, 
resources, and constraints (Aouadi et al., 2015). Smallholder farmers 
choose crops that allow them to maximize their total farm plus off-farm 
income (Zhang et al., 2018). They prefer growing labour-saving crops, 
like grain crops, allowing them more time to work off-farm. At the other 
side of the spectrum, business farms prioritize economic benefits from 
marketing their farm produce (Yu et al., 2021). It is anticipated that 
business farms would emphasize growing crop species with high gross 
margin to compensate for the cost of land rent (Huang, 2014; Zhao et al., 
2017). Furthermore, we expect an emphasis on crops that can be culti­
vated with low labour input by using machinery (Qiu et al., 2020). There 
is concern that changing from smallholder farms to business farms might 
result in a focus on few profitable and mechanizable crop species, while 
other crops might be lost, resulting in a reduced dietary diversity (Ric­
ciardi et al., 2021). There is little empirical evidence on effects of 
business farming on crop choice and farming practices in the NCP. 
The heat sum in the North China Plain is sufficient to grow two crops 
per year, e.g., wheat in the spring and maize in the summer. Such double 
cropping results in high production per unit area per year. However, 
inappropriately increasing cropping intensity (understood here as the 
number of crops harvested per year) increases groundwater use and may

1 In China, a family farm is defined as a farm that is run by a family and hires 
seasonal labour, and the farm size is mostly larger than 50 mu (3.3 ha).

2 A cooperative farm typically consists of at least five family farms investing 
together in machinery and wages.

3 Agricultural companies have the largest farm size among all business farm 
types. Such farms work with capital from investors. Agricultural companies are 
interested in employing professional managers for marketing and sales (Yu 
et al., 2021). Some agricultural companies have their own processing facilities.

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

3

result in groundwater overexploitation (Yang et al., 2021). The 
declining availability of groundwater is a serious issue in the NCP (van 
Oort et al., 2016). Hence, a reduction in cropping intensity (from two 
crops per year to one crop per year) has been proposed as a necessary 
mitigation to make cropping systems groundwater-neutral (van Oort 
et al., 2016). The Chinese government provides subsidies to farmers in 
areas with excessive groundwater extraction, including some areas of 
the NCP, to abandon winter wheat cultivation and keep land fallow in 
the winter from 2016 onwards. In Zhejiang province, a shift from double 
cropping to single cropping of rice has been observed in business farms 
compared to smallholder farms (van den Berg et al., 2007). There is no 
information on the effect of farm management models (i.e., smallholder 
farms and business farms) on cropping intensity in the NCP. 
In this study we used survey data to characterize differences between 
smallholder farms and business farms in terms of farm features, decision 
makers' attributes, crop species and cropping systems. We determined 
whether smallholder farms and business farms differed in terms of 
productivity per unit of area, economic sustainability and environ­
mental sustainability of crop production and we examined how crop 
management and cropping intensity were related to farm sustainability. 
With this we aimed to elucidate the implications of the emerging farm 
management model of business farms on the crop production sustain­
ability in the NCP.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Study area

We surveyed 505 households within Quzhou county in the NCP, 
located in southern Hebei (Fig. 1a). Quzhou's population is 527,304, 
distributed over ten townships with in total 342 villages. The total land 
area is 66,700 ha, of which 78% was arable land in 2017 (NBSC, 2017). 
As Quzhou is part of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei metropolitan region

(Fig. 1a), which has experienced rapid economic growth over the last 30 
years, local farmers can find employment in urban areas. The region has 
a continental warm and semi-humid monsoon climate featuring high 
temperatures and rainfall in summer and dry-cold weather in winter. 
Approximately 60% of the annual precipitation of 556 mm comes from 
rainfall in July and August. Wheat, maize and cotton are the dominant 
crops, while high-value crops have increased recently (Yang et al., 
2021a). Crop allocation varies between townships (Meng et al., 2021).

2.2. Stratified data collection

We developed a typology to group villages with similar crop pro­
duction and socio-economic characteristics in order to be able to collect 
a representative sample of farms in Quzhou using stratified random 
sampling. In this typology, we used demographic and economic vari­
ables, such as number of households per village and average household 
income, with data originating from yearbook data and unpublished 
survey information (Xu et al., 2024). In total, eight village types were 
identified, including one with a high level of urbanization and little or 
no crop production in the village, one with a sizeable arable land area 
and multiple farm management models, one with a sizeable arable land 
area but occupied by only smallholder farms, three with cereal domi­
nance, one with vegetable dominance, and one with diversified crop 
production. In the three village types with cereal dominance, one had 
relatively high vegetable production, one had small arable land area, 
and one had medium arable land area and population. Detailed de­
scriptions of the eight clusters can be found in Appendix A3. The village 
with heavy urbanization and nearly no crop production was excluded 
from the survey. In each of the remaining seven clusters, five villages 
were randomly selected (Fig. 1b). A total of fifteen farms were identified 
from each selected village. Business farms were always included if they 
were present in a village. The remaining smallholder farms were 
randomly selected to obtain a sample of 15 farms per village. A total of

Fig. 1. North China Plain, comprising the provinces Hebei, Henan and Shandong, and the urban districts of Beijing and Tianjin (a). Location of Quzhou county in 
southern Hebei (a) and geographic distribution of surveyed village types in Quzhou county (b). Quzhou is the green area indicated in panel (a) and shown enlarged in 
panel (b). The village typology shown in (b) was based on yearbook data (NBSC, 2017) and unpublished survey data on land-use. Black filled circles indicate the 
surveyed villages. Geographic data were provided by the county government. ‘NA’ means that the village data was excluded from the yearbook and ‘Outlier’ indicates 
inconsistent data in the yearbook, i.e., area of cropland was larger than the total area of the village. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

4

505 valid questionnaires were collected, covering 486 smallholder 
farms, 14 family farms, and five cooperative farms. We merged family 
farms and cooperative farms as business farms because there was a 
limited number of each. There were business farms in all village types, 
with village types 1–2 having the most (5), followed by village types 2 
and 3 (Table S1). 
We interviewed smallholder farmers and business farmers with the 
same structured questionnaire. Each questionnaire collected basic in­
formation at farm level, including farm size, the area of each one-year 
cropping system on the farm, and the age, schooling years, and years 
of farming experience of the decision maker. For each land parcel of the 
farm >0.5 mu (15 mu = 1 ha) we collected the inputs and outputs of the 
cultivated arable crops in a one-year cropping cycle (June 2019 – June 
2020). It took twenty minutes to collect the input-output inventory for 
each crop in each plot, so if multiple crops were grown in a plot in a year, 
collecting this information could take 40 or 60 min, depending on how 
many different crops were grown. Inputs were chemical fertilizers, 
manure, labour, and costs. Outputs included crop product outputs and 
farm-gate prices. Perennial crops and greenhouse crops were not com­
mon in Quzhou, so we did not collect information on them. Since veg­
etables and melons were frequently grown in tunnels, we did include in 
our survey tunnel-grown crops. We did the survey with six trained 
enumerators.

2.3. Cropping systems and calculation of multiple cropping index

The multiple cropping index for a plot (MCIp) was defined as the 
number of crops grown in the plot during the whole year, and the 
multiple cropping index for farm (MCIf) was calculated as the area- 
weighted average MCIp of all the plots larger than 0.5 mu on the farm. 
We identified five types of cropping systems based on the temporal and 
spatial patterns in which crop species were combined (Fig. 2 and Ap­
pendix A4). First of all, there are single crops (e.g., cotton) with only one 
crop per plot per year (MCIp = 1). There are also relay intercropping 
systems (e.g., cotton/mung bean) in which two crop species that cover a 
portion of the plot area in strips, with still only one crop on each area 
unit of land during the season (MCIp = 1). In double cropping (e.g., 
wheat-maize), two crops are grown after each other on the same plot in 
one year (MCIp = 2). In triple cropping (e.g. cabbage-cabbage-cabbage) 
the MCIp is 3. Finally, some cases of relay double cropping were found in 
which one species covers part of the area for a long period of time (in 
strips) while two other species are grown in other strips in a double 
cropping sequence after each other. In this case the multiple cropping 
index is 1.5. We did not collect data on multi-year crop rotations and 
cover crops were not found during the survey.

2.4. Calculations

2.4.1. Farm attributes and decision-maker attributes 
Farm size and ownership of machinery were used to characterize 
farms. We only counted the self-powered (diesel, gasoline and electric) 
machinery. In contrast, hand tools without an engine and tools meant for 
animal traction were excluded from the survey. Age, schooling years and 
cropping experience years were used to characterize farm decision 
makers' attributes.

2.4.2. Crop diversity 
We counted the number of crop species grown across all smallholder 
farms and all business farms to assess whether there was a difference in 
crop diversity between the two types of farm management models. As 
the number and total land area of smallholder farms and business farms 
were different, we used rarefaction (Gotelli, 2008) to standardize the 
diversity of crop species for the area. We randomly sampled 1000 times 
smallholder farms from the set of 486 smallholder farms until their total 
area was equal to that of the 19 business farms in the sample. We then 
generated a 95% confidence interval for the number of crops in the 
sample, using the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the 1000 generated crop 
numbers.

2.4.3. Sustainability indicators 
In this study, six sustainability indicators were chosen to evaluate 
business farms and smallholder farms' performance from the environ­
mental, societal and economic domains (Table 1). 
The temporal scale of all indicators was one year, and all indicators 
were assessed at two spatial levels, plot and farm. All indicators were 
first estimated for each plot >0.5 mu and then an average or total for the 
whole farm was calculated from the plot level data. The average indi­
cator value was calculated as an area-weighted average:

Xi =
∑n

j

Aij
∑Aij

Xij
(1)

where Xi is the average indicator value for farm i and Aij
∑

Aijrepresents the

area of plot j on farm i as a proportion of total farm size. Xij is the in­
dicator value in plot j on farm i and n is the number of plots in farm i. If a 
total for the whole farm was required, such as for total N surplus, this 
total was obtained as a weighted sum:

Xi =
∑n

j AijXij
(2)

where Aij is the area for plot i in farm j, Xij is the indicator value for this 
plot, and Xi is the weighted sum.

Fig. 2. Classification of one-year annual cropping system types. Different coloured boxes represent different annual crop species.

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

5

In order to assess the contribution of cropping frequency to the 
sustainability indicators, we divided the farm level indicator value by 
the multiple cropping index for the farm:

Xi,corrected =
Xi
MCIf,i

(3)

If MCIf,i = 1 there is no difference between Xi,corrected and Xi. 
In the case of relay intercropping and double relay intercropping, the 
values of inputs and outputs (except irrigation input) were obtained per 
crop species and expressed per unit area of the whole plot, either 
because the farmer expressed inputs and outputs immediately for the 
whole plot, or the farmer expressed the inputs and outputs per unit area 
of the species as well as the area proportion of each species within the 
plot.

2.4.4. Irrigation 
Farmers in Quzhou do not need to pay for irrigation water, but they 
do need to pay for the electrical power required to pump irrigation water 
from wells or rivers to the plot. The volume of irrigation water used in a 
plot was calculated using Eq. (4) (Di et al., 2019):

Irrigation = Costirrigation × Qpump × η

Priceelectricity × Ppump × 10 × NI
(4)

where Irrigation is the amount of irrigation water for a plot in one year 
(mm year−1) and NI is the number of irrigation events. Costirrigation is the 
paid amount for electricity per event (CNY ha−1), Qpump is the pump flow 
(m3 h−1), η is the transformer efficiency (85% in Quzhou), Priceelectricity is 
the price of per unit of electricity (CNY (kW h)−1), and Ppump is the pump 
power (kW). Ten is the conversion coefficient between mm and m3 ha−1.

2.4.5. Pesticide use 
Treatment Frequency Index (TFI) was used to characterize pesticide 
use frequency. A single TFI was determined in aggregate for all types of 
biocides, including insecticides, fungicides and herbicides. TFI was 
calculated as the number of full doses applied (Lechenet et al., 2014). If 
two pesticide products were applied as a mixture of two full doses in one 
spray, this is counted as two applications in the calculation of TFI. In our 
survey, farmers usually did not recall the name of the pesticide that they 
used in the last year, but they remembered how many tanks (of 20 l) 
with protectant they applied in a plot for each type of pesticide each 
time.

2.4.6. N surplus 
N surplus (kg N ha−1 year−1) was calculated as the difference be­
tween input and output:

Nsurplus = Nin −Nout
(5)

where Nin and Nout indicate the crop-specific amount of N input (kg N 
ha−1 year−1) and N output (kg N ha−1 year−1). N output includes N from 
yield and stover removed from the field and the calculation is further 
elaborated in Appendices A5 and A6.

2.4.7. Dietary energy yield 
The production of dietary energy (Gcal ha−1 year−1) was calculated 
as:

Dietary energy yield = Y × EP × EC
(6)

where Y (Mg ha−1 year−1) is the dry matter yield for cereals, legume 
crops, sunflower, and oilseed and the fresh yield for vegetables, tuber 
crops and watermelon. The EP and EC indicate edible proportion and 
energy content (Gcal Mg−1) and the values are in Table S5.

2.4.8. Labour use 
We summed up the time farmers spent on manual cropping activities 
to quantify annual labour use (h ha−1 year−1). This included time for soil 
preparation, sowing, mineral fertilizer and manure application, pesti­
cide use, irrigation, weeding and harvesting, and also some special 
measures for specific crops, like top removal of cotton. Labor input was 
zero if the activity was done by a hired machinery service. The time 
spent operating the machinery was recorded if the machinery was self- 
owned. 
Gross margin (CNY ha−1 year−1) was calculated as the sum of gross 
revenue (CNY ha−1 year−1) and subsidies (Appendix A2) minus costs 
(CNY ha−1 year−1). Gross revenue was calculated from the product of 
crop yield and the farmgate price. The costs included variable costs and 
cropland lease fees. Variable costs covered all costs of agricultural ma­
terial inputs, including seeds, (plastic) mulch, fertilizer, manure, pesti­
cides, irrigation and purchased service (machinery and labour).

2.5. Statistical analysis

We used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to compare attributes and 
performance metrics of the two farm management models. RStudio 
(RStudio team, 2021) and R Version 4.1.0 (R Core Team, 2021) were 
used for statistical analysis and data visualization.

3. Results

3.1. Farm and decision maker attributes

The average size of business farms was 14.61 ha (range 1.86–40.00 
ha) while the average size of smallholder farms was 0.78 ha (range 
0.06–2.00 ha) (Table 2). Business farms had on average 2.32 self-owned 
self-powered machines, e.g., for sowing, combine harvesting or weed­
ing, whereas smallholder farms had on average 0.04 self-powered ma­
chines per farm (p < 0.05) (Table 2). Smallholder farms relied mostly on 
machinery services rather than own equipment. The decision makers of 
business farms were younger and better educated but had less cropping 
experience compared to smallholder farms (Table 2).

3.2. Crops and cropping systems

Eleven crop species were grown on both business farms and small­
holder farms, including three species of cereal (wheat, maize, and mil­
let), four vegetables (cabbage, cauliflower, chili and spinach), cotton, 
stevia and two other crops (chrysanthemum, for use as a herbal tea, and 
watermelon). Five crops were only grown on business farms, and 13

Table 1 
List of sustainability indicators.

Indicator 
Unit 
Rationale

Environmental   
Irrigation input 
mm year−1 
Groundwater table has declined in 
the NCP over 30 years (Yang et al., 
2021b) 
Pesticide treatment 
frequency index 
(TFI)

Number of full 
pesticide doses 
plot−1 year−1

Excessive and improper pesticide 
use is a sustainability threat in 
China (Mu et al., 2022). 
N surplus 
kg N ha−1 year−1 
The NCP is an area with high N 
surpluses (Meng et al., 2021) so N 
surplus should be reduced. 
Societal   
Dietary energy yield 
Gcal ha−1 year−1 
The Chinese central government 
attaches high importance to 
national food self-sufficiency. 
Labour use 
h ha−1 year−1 
Rural population migration to 
cities causes agricultural labour 
shortage in China (Xu et al., 2019). 
Economic   
Gross margin 
CNY ha−1 year−1 
High profitability is the major 
interest of farmers (Fletcher, 
2019).

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

6

were only grown on smallholder farms, with cash crops making up most 
of the non-shared crops (Table 3). 
Approximately 60% of smallholder farms and business farms pro­
duced maize and wheat (Figs. 3a,b). On smallholder farms, wheat and 
maize made up 70% of farm area, while business farms cultivated wheat 
and maize on only 33% of their land (Figs. 3c,d). Approximately 24% of

the farm area was dedicated to cotton cultivation on both smallholder 
and business farms (Figs. 3c,d). However, the proportion of farms 
cultivating cotton was larger among smallholder farms than business 
farms. A greater proportion of business farms than smallholder farms 
grew vegetables and stevia, with almost 50% and 37% of business farms 
producing vegetables and stevia, respectively, but fewer than 10% of 
smallholder farms growing these crops (Figs. 3a-3d). Few smallholder 
and business farms planted legumes on their farms, but the cultivated 
species differed significantly between the two management models, 
with soybean being cultivated mostly on business farms (in 3/19 farms) 
and mung bean (20/486) and peanut (9/486) on smallholder farms 
(Table 2). Business farms tended to have higher crop diversity per farm 
than smallholder farms (Fig. 3e). Using rarefaction to correct for the 
larger land area on business farms than smallholder farms, the data point 
for the business farms was within the confidence zone of the rarefaction 
curve for smallholder farms; hence there was no significant difference in 
the overall number of crop species per farm type when the larger total 
area of smallholder farms was taken into account. Business farms 
showed a greater evenness of land use than smallholder farms (Fig. 3c, 
d). 
The multiple cropping index was 1.73 ± 0.02 for smallholder farms 
and 1.42 ± 0.06 for business farms (Figs. 4a,b). Smallholder farms had 
68% double cropping and 31% single cropping, while business farms 
had 61% single cropping and 36% double cropping (Figs. 4c,d). Relay- 
intercropping was not conducted on business farms, and covered 0.5% 
of the total cropland area on smallholder farms. Other cropping systems

Table 2 
Farm characteristics and farmer attributes of smallholder farms and business 
farms in Quzhou. Values represent mean ± standard error of the mean for each 
variable. The p values result from Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests comparing small­
holder farms and business farms.

Variable 
Unit 
Smallholder farms 
(n = 486) 
Business 
farms 
(n = 19)

p- 
value

Farm attributes     
Farm size 
ha 
0.78 ± 0.03 
14.61 ±
2.32 
<0.01

Self-owned 
machinery 
number 
farm−1

0.04 ± 0.01 
2.32 ±
0.70 
<0.01

Decision maker 
attributes     
Age 
years 
60.1 ± 0.4 
46.4 ± 1.7 
<0.01 
Schooling years 
years 
5.84 ± 0.20 
9.94 ±
0.30 
<0.01

Cropping 
experience 
years 
37.0 ± 0.5 
16.8 ± 2.9 
<0.05

Table 3 
List of crop species and frequency of cultivation on smallholder and business farms. Salmon pink 
colour indicates that crops are grown on both farm management models; the green indicates the crops 
are only produced on smallholder farms; and the yellow indicates the crops are only cultivated on 
business farms. Crops are ordered according to their frequency from top to bottom.

Group
Crop name
Latin name
Smallholder farms
Business farms

(n=486)
(n=19)

Cereals
Maize
Zea mays
439
15

Wheat
Triticum aestivum
414
12

Millet
Setaria italica
9
4

Fiber crop
Cotton
Gossypium hirsutum
235
7

Industrial crop Stevia
Stevia rebaudiana
31
7

Vegetables
Chili
Capsicum frutescens
31
3

Cabbage
Brassica oleracea var. capitata
24
7

Spinach
Spinacia oleracea
6
1

Cauliflower
Brassica oleracea var. botrytis
4
1

Kidney bean
Phaseolus vulgaris
10

Eggplant
Solanum melongena
8

Garlic
Allium sativum
7

Chinese cabbage Brassica pekinensis
3

Scallion
Allium fistulosum
2

Onion
Allium cepa
1

Zucchini
Cucurbita pepo
1

Kohlrabi
Brassica oleracea var. gongylodes
1

Broccoli
Brassica oleracea var. italica
1

Squash
Cucurbita moschata
1

Legumes
Mung bean
Phaseolus radiatus
7

Peanut
Arachis hypogaea
9

Soybean
Glycine max
4

Other crops
Watermelon
Citrullus lanatus
2
2

Chrysanthemum
Chrysanthemum indicum L.
1
2

Sunflower
Helianthus annuus
2

Oilseed
Brassica chinensis
1

Tuber crops
Potato
Solanum tuberosum
1

Sweet potato
Ipomoea batatas
2

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

7

(caption on next page)

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

8

were rarely found (Appendix A4).

3.3. Cropping system sustainability indicators

We compared sustainability indicators of seven crops with more than 
three observations in both business and smallholder farms (Fig. 5). 
Maize and stevia had 19% and 18% greater N output (in product), 
respectively, on business farms than on smallholder farms, resulting in a 
24% and 37% lower N surplus. Business farms had 53% and 85% lower

N surplus than smallholder farms for chili and millet, respectively. The 
higher nitrogen use efficiency on business farms resulted from 21% and 
57% lower N input for growing chili and millet as well as a 34% higher N 
output of chili on business farms (Figs. S1d,e). There was no difference 
in pesticide use if a crop was grown on a business farm or a smallholder 
farm. The irrigation water used by business and smallholder farms was 
nearly identical, except in cotton where business farms used less irri­
gation water in cotton than smallholder farms did (on average, 1.6 
irrigation events per crop on business farms and 2.2 irrigation events on

Fig. 3. Percentage of farms cultivating certain crops (a, b) and percentage of the farm area cultivated with different crops (c, d) on smallholder farms (a, c) and 
business farms (b, d). The number of crop species per farm on smallholder (cyan) and business farms (salmon pink) (e). Rarefaction of the number of crop species 
across all smallholder farms with given cumulative area and the number of crop species across all business farms (red dot) (f). In panels c and d the total percentage is 
larger than 100% due to multiple cropping and the total percentage value divided by 100 is equal to the multiple cropping index. In panel e, the white point denotes 
the mean. The grey zone in panel f indicates a 95% confidence interval for the rarified number of crop species, based on bootstrapping. The actual number of crop 
species on smallholder farms was 23 (Table 3). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.)

Fig. 4. The multiple cropping index (MCI) per farm (a, b) and types of cropping systems (c, d) of smallholder farms (a, c) and business farms (b, d) on average across 
all farms. The dashed lines in panels a and b indicate the mean MCI for each farm management model.

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

9

smallholder farms). Business farms had 1.7 Mg ha−1 greater maize yield 
than smallholder farms, 0.9 Mg ha−1 greater yield of stevia, and 19.4 Mg 
ha−1 greater yield of chili, while yields of other crops did not differ 
significantly among the two farm types. Business farms used less labour 
than smallholder farms for growing the same crop. Compared to 
smallholder farms, business farms had 40% lower labour consumption in 
maize, 24% lower labour consumption in cotton, and 96% lower labour 
consumption in millet. Business farms used machinery for sowing and 
harvesting millet while smallholder farmers did this by hand. Gross 
revenue in business farms exceeded that in smallholder farms by 24% in 
maize, 10% in wheat and 27% in stevia, but there was no significant 
difference in gross margin per ha due to higher costs in business farms.

3.4. Farm sustainability indicators

Three out of six sustainability indicators differed significantly be­
tween smallholder farms and business farms, and for two out of these 
three indicators, the sustainability performance of business farms was 
better than that of smallholder farms (Figs. 6,S2 and Table S8). Business 
farms had significantly lower N surplus and irrigation water use per ha 
per year than smallholder farms. While spending less on pesticides due 
to business farms obtaining lower prices, business farms had the same 
pesticide use as smallholder farms. Gross revenue per ha per year of 
business farms was 2.2 times that of smallholder farms, but business 
farms had 75% greater costs per ha per year than smallholder farms, 
mainly due to the cost of hired labour and renting cropland, which were 
approximately ten times higher than for smallholder farms, which used 
mainly their own labour (Fig. S3). As a result, there was no significant 
difference in gross margin per ha per year between business farms and

smallholder farms (when not accounting for the cost of own labour on 
both farm types). The mean dietary energy yield per ha per year of 
business farms was 33% lower than that of smallholder farms. The la­
bour consumption per ha per year did not differ between business farms 
and smallholder farms. 
Some of the differences in indicators between smallholder and 
business farms were due to the greater use of double cropping on 
smallholder farms. Only two out of six indicators were different between 
business farms and smallholder farms after correcting for MCI. Cor­
recting for MCI means that indicators are expressed per crop rather than 
per year (Figs. 7,S4 and Table S9). There was no significant difference 
between business farms and smallholder farms in N input and N output 
per ha per year but business farms had nevertheless 27% lower N surplus 
per crop, indicating higher N use efficiency. There was also no signifi­
cant difference between business farms and smallholder farms in pesti­
cide usage and labour consumption after correcting for MCI. No 
significant difference was found in irrigation input per crop between 
business farms and smallholder farms. Correcting for MCI enlarged the 
gross margin gap between business farms and smallholder farms and the 
difference was significant (Table S8,9). On the one hand, business farms 
grew more high-value crops than smallholder farms. On the other hand, 
higher MCI helped smallholder farmers close the gross margin gap per 
ha per year between them and business farms. There was no difference 
between business farms and smallholder farms regarding dietary energy 
yield per ha per crop (Fig. 7). Thus the lower dietary energy yield on 
business farms per ha per year was entirely due to the lower use of 
double cropping and the lower land allocation to cereals.

Fig. 5. Sustainability indicators for shared crops with more than three observations on smallholder and business farms: N surplus (a); pesticide use (b); irrigation (c); 
yield (d,e); labour consumption (f) and gross margin (g). Large coloured circles represent the means, while the error bars represent the standard error of the mean. 
Small grey circles represent individual observations and n is the number of observations. The salmon pink colour represents business farms while cyan colour 
represents smallholder farms. Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests were done to compare distributions, and the star sign represents a significant differences (P<0.05). Crop 
order is according to the number of observations from top to bottom. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the 
web version of this article.)

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

10

4. Discussion

4.1. Crop diversity and crop allocation

We found no difference between smallholder and business farms in 
the number of crops across all farms, but the crop allocation differed. 
Business farms grew more vegetables, and smallholder farms grew more 
grains. A major reason for low allocation to vegetables on smallholder 
farms is that the farmers prefer growing labour-saving crops, like grains, 
as they hold part-time jobs (Wang et al., 2017a, 2017b). As a result of 
aging agricultural labor in rural areas and the ongoing trend of migra­
tion to urban areas (Ren et al., 2023), smallholder farms are less able to 
cultivate labour-intensive crops such as vegetables. Business farms, on 
the other hand, can mitigate the issue through mechanization or hiring 
labour. On business farms, crops with high economic value are priori­
tized (Otsuka et al., 2016b). Crop and dietary diversity may be main­
tained with the expansion of business farms. However, food systems may 
be influenced by the expansion of business farms; more vegetables are 
provided to consumers, but the production of feed is reduced as the land 
allocation to maize was lower on business farms while about 60% of 
maize is utilized for animal feed in China (Ely et al., 2016). 
Business farms produced less dietary energy per ha than smallholder 
farms, not because of different yields, but because of different crop 
allocation. Business farms had 20% higher maize yield than smallholder

farms, and the same wheat and millet yield. However, there was a 
smaller area of land allocated to maize and wheat cultivation in business 
farms and a lower cropping intensity in maize and wheat cultivation. For 
instance, on business farms, maize and millet were grown as single crops 
(one crop per year) while on smallholder farms, maize was usually 
grown as part of the wheat-maize double cropping system. This resulted 
in lower dietary energy yields on business farms per unit area compared 
to smallholder farms since maize and wheat contributed the most to 
dietary energy production and smallholders overwhelmingly cultivated 
these crops using double cropping (Table S7). To boost grain production, 
the Chinese central government subsidizes grain farmers (Song et al., 
2021). However, the subsidies and the net return from grain production 
cannot cover land rental costs, and business farmers are therefore less 
interested in grain production than smallholders. If no other in­
terventions are made in the current context, business farm expansion 
may result in cash crops substituting grains. This would run against the 
government's objective to maintain grain production area in the NCP 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affiairs of the People’s Republic of 
China, 2022).

4.2. Effect of farm size on crop production sustainability

We compared the crop sustainability performance of smallholder and 
business farmers at two scales: the crop scale and the farm scale.

Fig. 6. Sustainability indicators of smallholder and business farms: N surplus (a); pesticides use (b); irrigation (c); dietary energy yield (d); labour use (e) and gross 
margin (f). The salmon pink lines represent business farms and the cyan lines represent smallholder farms. D is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic and p is the 
associated p value. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

11

Business farms outperformed in two environmental indicators (N sur­
plus and irrigation water use) but underperformed in dietary energy 
yield (Fig. 6 and Table S8). 
Better management helps business farms achieve lower N surplus 
than smallholder farms. Lower N input and higher N output in some 
crops (maize, stevia, chili and millet) were the reasons for business farms 
achieving low N surplus, which is consistent with Yu et al. (2021). 
Business farms reduce fertilizer costs as much as possible and therefore 
reduce fertilizer inputs (Ju et al., 2016). Conversely, it is common for 
smallholder farmers to overapply fertilizer to try and compensate for 
suboptimal management and to reach yield targets (Ren et al., 2021). 
Despite their lower N surplus of 206 kg N ha−1 year,−1 business farms 
still exceed the target surplus of 90 kg N ha−1 year−1 (Zhang et al., 2019) 
and have a risk of N pollution. 
Lower farm MCI contributed to lower irrigation input per ha at the 
farm scale in business farms. Business farms neither reduced irrigation 
frequency (except in cotton) nor used modern irrigation equipment to 
save irrigation water consumption. In Northwestern China, larger farms 
are more likely to use drip irrigation (Feike et al., 2017). However, only 
one business farm in our sample used modern irrigation equipment; 
most business farms showed a strong willingness to use water-saving 
irrigation equipment, but had not done so yet. Besides, in our study, 
business farms did not try modern irrigation practices, like shortening

the duration of irrigation events, as American business farms did (Skaggs 
and Samani, 2005). Simply having low cropping intensity without 
improving irrigation practices or techniques in business farms cannot 
address groundwater depletion. 
We expected business farms to use less pesticide than smallholder 
farms because the managers are better educated and younger and may 
optimize their pesticide use better than smallholders did. However, in 
our study, there was no difference in pesticide use between business and 
smallholder farms. 
Business farms are expected to have diversified sales channels to gain 
higher farm gate prices than smallholder farms (Hao et al., 2018), such 
as directly selling products to processing firms or improving the quality 
of products to meet the requirements of high-value-added markets (Yu 
et al., 2021). Apart from stevia, in our survey, business farms sold their 
crops to intermediaries at low prices during the harvest season, much 
like smallholder farms did (Fig. S1a). Although business farms received 
higher subsidies than smallholder farms (Appendix A2) and allocated a 
larger proportion of their area to high economic value crops than 
smallholders did, significant expenditures on leased cropland and hired 
labour (Fig. S3) offset these gains, which resulted in a gross margin per 
ha that was similar to that achieved on smallholder farms. 
More self-owned machinery helps business farms to have lower labor 
consumption in maize, cotton, and millet cultivation. Purchased

Fig. 7. MCI-corrected sustainability indicators of smallholder and business farms: N surplus (a); pesticide use(b); irrigation (c); dietary energy yield (d); labour use 
(e) and gross margin (f). The salmon pink lines represent business farms and the cyan lines represent smallholder farms. D is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic 
and p is the associated p value. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

12

machinery services help smallholder farms without self-owned ma­
chinery save labour consumption. However, there are also some limi­
tations in purchased machinery services. On the one hand, the cost of 
purchased machinery service leads smallholder farmers to abandon 
machinery and use labour to control the costs of input, such as har­
vesting maize and sowing cotton. On the other hand, purchased ma­
chinery services are not always available. In Quzhou, millet harvest 
machinery is rarely provided by rental companies, so smallholder 
farmers harvested millet by hand, but business farms harvested millet 
using their self-owned machinery. There are no differences in labour 
consumption per unit area between farm management models at the 
farm scale due to the lack of picking machinery for vegetables and 
stevia. 
Robust off-farm economic growth facilitates more non-farm 
employment opportunities for family labour, which in turn contributes 
to merging small farms into large-sized businesses and substitute ma­
chinery for family labour. This trend is ongoing in many Asian countries 
undergoing rapid economic growth, including Vietnam (Duong and 
Thanh, 2019), India (Kumar and Moharaj, 2023), Indonesia (Yamauchi, 
2016), Nepal (Ghimire and Huang, 2016) and China. Better education 
contributes to business farms being more willing to spend time and 
money studying in technical school and adopting more sustainable 
farming practices than smallholder farms (Woodhouse, 2010; Duan and 
Zhou, 2014; Wang et al., 2017a, 2017b), which contributes significantly 
to sustainability differences between business and smallholder farms 
(Sheng et al., 2014). However, it depends on the context which sus­
tainable practices business farmers adopt, which leads to a variation in 
the sustainability advantage of business farms over smallholder farms. 
Business farms may face disadvantages in some sustainability di­
mensions depending on their cultivated crops and adoptions of prac­
tices. Therefore, it is crucial to design policies and education programs 
targeting large-sized business farmers and to induce them to facilitate 
positive changes in practices.

4.3. Limitations and outlook

Our research has shown multiple differences between business and 
smallholder farms in crop allocation, management practices, cropping 
intensity (MCI), and sustainability performance of crop production in 
the NCP. However, some limitations are worth noting. Farm sustain­
ability depends on crop management, cropping intensity, and crop 
choice (Aouadi et al., 2015). We identified how management practices 
and cropping intensity affected sustainability differences within farm 
management models. We did not discuss the influence of the area of non- 
shared crops on smallholder farms and business farms on sustainability 
in the study, because the area of such crops that are only planted in one 
of the farm management models occupied relatively small proportions 
on smallholder farms (2%) and business farms (14%) (Table S6). 
Therefore, non-shared crops have a limited impact on sustainability 
performance. 
Another limitation of our study is the sample size of business farms 
(19 observations). Although business farms' share of the total land area 
increases rapidly (area proportion from negligible in 2008 to nearly 20% 
in 2013 (Huang and Ding, 2016)), business farms are still a small frac­
tion of the total population of farms. In Quzhou, there were about 199 
business farms in 342 villages in 2020. The results of statistical analysis 
indicate that the sample size of 19 business farms in 35 villages in our 
study is sufficient to draw conclusions and find significant differences. 
We did not assess heterogeneity between different types of business 
farm. Yu et al. (2021) reported that there was significant heterogeneity 
in management practices and sustainability within business farm types 
in Zhejiang province, including family farms, cooperative farms and 
agricultural companies. The sample size of business farms could be 
increased in future work to analyze heterogeneity among business farm 
types, which can deepen our understanding of the impact of business 
farms on crop production in the NCP. An advantage of our sampling

approach is that location factors such as soil type and access to water are 
likely to be similar among these two farm types since business farms and 
smallholder farms originated from the same villages; hence there is little 
risk of bias in this respect. 
Recent findings suggest that the benefits of farm size expansion are 
affected by topography and local economic development (Duan et al., 
2021; Ricciardi et al., 2021). So far, the hypothesis that business farms 
are more sustainable than smallholder farms in China has been inves­
tigated primarily in the plains, such as the Northeast and the NCP (Wang 
et al., 2017a, 2017b; Zhang et al., 2021; Zou et al., 2022). Further work 
is needed in mountainous areas. It is also interesting to do this com­
parison of business farms and smallholder farms in areas with different 
economic development within China. Such an analysis may help to 
determine in which production situation the development of business 
farming as a farm management model is most promising. Also, future 
studies could compare in detail management practices of a crop between 
business farms and smallholder farms, like crop varieties, sowing and 
harvest date, the type of fertilizers and pesticide. Such information can 
give further insight how business farms achieve certain improvements 
compared to smallholder farms. Finally, product quality may be 
compared between the two farm management models.

5. Conclusion

We comprehensively compared smallholder and business farms 
regarding farm attributes, decision-maker attributes, crop allocation, 
and sustainability performance in the North China Plain. Compared to 
smallholder farms, business farms were operated by younger and better- 
educated decision-makers than smallholder farms. They had larger farm 
sizes and more self-owned machinery. The shift from smallholder farms 
to business farms did not cause a loss in crop diversity across all farms 
but reoriented crop production by substituting grains with cash crops. 
Business farms allocated less area to grain production and had a lower 
cropping intensity (less double cropping) than smallholder farms. 
Compared with smallholder farms, business farms had better environ­
mental sustainability performance, including lower N surplus and irri­
gation input, due to better management practices and lower cropping 
intensity. However, trade-offs existed; business farms had lower dietary 
energy yield than smallholder farms. In terms of sustainability, our re­
sults show that business farms are not a panacea solving all challenges in 
Chinese farming. Furthermore, about 30% of cropland in China is in 
mountainous regions, making it challenging to expand farm size and 
develop business farms in such areas. Instead of only focusing on the 
expansion of business farming, pathways need to be identified for sus­
tainable farming for all farm management models. Business farms may 
be given more guidance to optimize their resource allocation to mitigate 
the trade-offs, i.e., reduced dietary energy yield. Smallholder farms 
should not be neglected since smallholder farms are a key contributor to 
grain production. The main challenge for smallholder farms is earning a 
decent income on a small farm size.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Zhan Xu: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualiza­
tion, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Zhengyuan 
Liang: Data curation, Investigation. Jiali Cheng: Data curation, Inves­
tigation. Jeroen C.J. Groot: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. 
Chaochun Zhang: Funding acquisition, Resources, Supervision, Writing 
– review & editing. Wen-Feng Cong: Funding acquisition, Supervision. 
Fusuo Zhang: Project administration, Resources. Wopke van der Werf: 
Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of Competing Interest

None.

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

13

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgements

This work received financial support from the Cooperative Project of 
Chinese Academy of Engineering (2020-FJ-XZ-8) and China Scholarship 
Council (CSC) (grant number is No.201913043) and Hainan University. 
In particular, we would like to thank Nico Heerink and Fan Li for their 
valuable suggestions. We thank Dongsheng Li, Shuai Han, Yingying 
Wang and Jiahui Ji for their contribution to farm survey data collection.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.agsy.2024.103896.

References

Aouadi, N., Aubertot, J.N., Caneill, J., Munier-Jolain, N., 2015. Analyzing the impact of 
the farming context and environmental factors on cropping systems: a regional case 
study in Burgundy. Eur. J. Agron. 66, 21–29. 
Brauns, B., Jakobsen, R., Song, X., Bjerg, P.L., 2018. Pesticide use in the wheat-maize 
double cropping systems of the North China plain: assessment, field study, and 
implications. Sci. Total Environ. 616, 1307–1316. 
Deininger, K., Jin, S., Xia, F., 2014. Moving off the farm: land institutions to facilitate 
structural transformation and agricultural productivity growth in China. World Dev. 
59, 505–520. 
Di, Z., Yang, L., Xu, X., Gou, W., 2019. Study on irrigation water price and the impact of 
hydrological year on project incomes in pumping irrigation district. J. Tianjin Agric. 
Coll. 2, 80–84 (in Chinese).  
Duan, Y., Zhou, G., 2014. Promoting Development of New Management Model for Grain 
Production. China Agriculture Press, Beijing.  
Duan, J., Ren, C., Wang, S., Zhang, X., Reis, S., Xu, J., Gu, B., 2021. Consolidation of 
agricultural land can contribute to agricultural sustainability in China. Nat. Food 2, 
1014–1022. 
Duong, P., Thanh, P., 2019. Adoption and effects of modern rice varieties in Vietnam: 
Micro-econometric analysis of household surveys. Econ. Anal. Policy 64, 282–292. 
Ely, A., Geall, S., Song, Y., 2016. Sustainable maize production and consumption in 
China: practices and poltics in transition. J. Clean. Prod. 259, 268. 
Feike, T., Khor, L.Y., Mamitimin, Y., Ha, N., Li, L., Abdusalih, N., Xiao, H., Doluschitz, R., 
2017. Determinants of cotton farmers’ irrigation water management in arid 
northwestern China. Agric Water Manag 187, 1–10. 
Fletcher, A., 2019. Benchmarking break-crops with wheat reveals higher risk may limit 
on farm adoption. Eur. J. Agron. 109, 125921. 
Foley, J.A., Ramankutty, N., Brauman, K.A., Cassidy, E.S., Gerber, J.S., Johnston, M., 
Mueller, N.D., O’Connell, C., Ray, D.K., West, P.C., Balzer, C., Bennett, E.M., 
Carpenter, S.R., Hill, J., Monfreda, C., Polasky, S., Rockstrom, J., Sheehan, J., 
Siebert, S., Tilman, D., Zaks, D.P.M., 2011. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature 
478, 337–342. 
Ghimire, R., Huang, W., 2016. Adoption pattern and welfare impact of agricultural 
technology: empirical evidence from rice farmers in Nepal. J. S. Asian. Dev. 11, 
113–137. 
Giller, K.E., Delaune, T., Silva, J.V., Descheemaeker, K., van de Ven, G., Schut, A.G.T., 
van Wijk, M., Hammond, J., Hochman, Z., Taulya, G., Chikowo, R., Narayanan, S., 
Kishore, A., Bresciani, F., Teixeira, H.M., Andersson, J.A., van Ittersum, M.K., 2021. 
The future of farming: who will produce our food? Food Secur. 13, 1073–1099. 
Gotelli, N.J., 2008. A Primer of Ecology, fourth edition. Sinauer Associates, 
Massachusetts.  
Hao, J., Bijman, J., Gardebroek, C., Heerink, N., Heijman, W., Huo, Xuexi, 2018. 
Cooperative membership and farmers’ choice of marketing channels- evidence from 
apple farmers in Shanxi and Shandong provinces, China. Food Policy 74, 53–64. 
Holst, J., Liu, W., Zhang, Q., Doluschitz, R., 2014. Crop evapotranspiration, arable 
cropping systems and water sustainability in southern Hebei, P.R. China. Agric. 
Water Manag. 141, 47–54. 
Huang, W., 2014. The non-agricultural and the non-grain oriented risk and it’s 
circumventions in agricultural land transfer. Contemp. Econ. Manag. 36, 39–43 (in 
Chinese).  
Huang, J., Ding, J., 2016. Institutional innovation and policy support to facilitate small- 
scale farming transformation in China. Agric. Econ. 47, 227–237. 
Huang, J., Wang, X., Qiu, H., 2012. Small-Scale Farmers in China in the Face of 
Modernization and Globalization. IIED/HIVOS, London/The Hague.  
Ji, X., Rozelle, S., Huang, J., Zhang, L., Zhang, T., 2016. Are China's farms growing? 
China World Econ. 24, 41–62. 
Ju, X., Xing, G., Chen, X., Zhang, S., Zhang, L., Liu, X., Cui, Z., Yin, B., Christie, P., 
Zhu, Z., Zhang, F., 2009. Reducing environmental risk by improving N management 
in intensive Chinese agricultural systems. PNAS 106, 3041–3046. 
Ju, X., Gu, B., Wu, Y., Galloway, J.N., 2016. Reducing China’s fertilizer use by increasing 
farm size. Glob. Environ. Change 41, 26–32.

Koirala, P., Kotani, K., Managi, S., 2022. How do farm size and perceptions matter for 
farmers’ adaptation responses to climate change in a developing country? Evidence 
from Nepal. Econ. Anal. Policy 74, 188–204. 
Kumar, K.K., Moharaj, P., 2023. Farm size nad productivity relationship among the 
farming communities in India. Outlook Agric. 52, 212–227. 
Lechenet, M., Bretagnolle, V., Bockstaller, C., Boissinot, F., Petit, M.S., Munier-Jolain, N. 
M., 2014. Reconciling pesticide reduction with economic and environmental 
sustainability in arable farming. PloS One 9, e97922. 
Liebert, J., Benner, R., Bezner Kerr, R., Bjorkman, T., De Master, K.T., Gennet, S., 
Gomez, M.I., Hart, A.K., Kremen, C., Power, A.G., Ryan, M.R., 2022. Farm size 
affects the use of agroecological practices on organic farms in the United States. Nat. 
Plants 8, 897–905. 
Meng, F., Wang, M., Strokal, M., Kroeze, C., Ma, L., Li, Y., Zhang, Q., Wei, Z., Hou, Y., 
Liu, X., Xu, W., Zhang, F., 2021. Nitrogen losses from food production in the North 
China plain: a case study for Quzhou. Sci. Total Environ. 816, 151557. 
Meyfroidt, P., 2017. Mapping Farm size globally: benchmarking the smallholders debate. 
Environ. Res. Lett. 12, 10–13. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affiairs of the People’s Republic of China, 2022. The 
Plan of National Crop Production Development for the 14th Five-Year (in Chinese).  
Mu, H., Zhang, J., Yang, X., Wang, K., Xu, W., Zhang, H., Liu, X., Risema, C., Geissen, V., 
2022. Pesticide screening and health risk assessment of residential dust in a rural 
region of the North China plain. Chemosphere 303, 135115. 
National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC), 2013. China Statistics Yearbook. Chinese 
Statistics Press, Beijing (in Chinese).  
National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC), 2017. China Statistics Yearbook. Chinese 
Statistics Press, Beijing (in Chinese).  
National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC), 2020. China Statistics Yearbook. Chinese 
Statistics Press, Beijing (in Chinese).  
Niu, Y., Xie, G., Xiao, Y., Liu, J., Wang, Y., Luo, Q., Zou, H., Gan, S., Qin, K., Huang, M., 
2021. Spatiotemporal patterns and determinants of grain self-sufficiency in China. 
Foods 10, 747. 
Otsuka, K., Liu, Y., Yamauchi, F., 2016a. The future of small farms in Asia. Dev. Policy 
Rev. 34, 441–461. 
Otsuka, K., Liu, Y., Yamauchi, F., 2016b. Growing advantage of large farms in Asia and 
its implications for global food security. Glob. Food Sec. 11, 5–10. 
Qiu, T., Boris Choy, S.T., Li, S., He, Q., Luo, B., 2020. Does land renting-in reduce grain 
production? Evidence from rural China. Land Use Policy 90, 104311. 
R Core Team, 2021. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.  
Rada, N., Fuglie, K., 2019. New perspectives on farm size and productivity. Food Policy 
84, 147–152. 
Rada, N., Wang, C., Qin, L., 2015. Subsidy or market reform? Rethinking China’s farm 
consolidation strategy. Food Policy 57, 93–103. 
Ren, C., Liu, S., van Grinsven, H., Reis, S., Jin, S., Liu, H., Gu, B., 2019. The impact of 
farm size on agricultural sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 220, 357–367. 
Ren, C., Jin, S., Wu, Y., Zhang, B., Kanter, D., Wu, B., Xi, X., Zhang, X., Chen, D., Xu, J., 
Gu, B., 2021. Fertilizer overuse in Chinese smallholders due to lack of fixed inputs. 
J. Environ. Manage. 293, 112913. 
Ren, C., Zhou, X., Wang, C., Guo, Y., Diao, Y., Shen, S., Reis, S., Li, W., Xu, J., Gu, B., 
2023. Aging threatens sustainability of smallholder farming in China. Nature 616, 
96–103. 
Ricciardi, V., Mehrabi, Z., Wittman, H., James, D., Ramankutty, N., 2021. Higher yields 
and more biodiversity on smaller farms. Nat. Sustain. 4, 651–657. 
RStudio Team, 2021. RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. RStudio, PBC, 
Boston.  
Samberg, L.H., Gerber, J.S., Ramankutty, N., Herrero, M., West, P.C., 2016. Subnational 
distribution of average farm size and smallholder contributions to global food 
production. Environ. Res. Lett. 11, 124010. 
Shen, M., Shen, J., 2018. Evaluating the cooperative and family farm programs in China: 
a rural governance perspective. Land Use Policy 79, 240–250. 
Sheng, Y., Zhao, S., Nossal, K., Zhang, D., 2014. Productivity and farm size in Australian 
agriculture: reinvestigating the returns to scale. Aust. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 59, 
16–38. 
Song, X., Wang, X., Li, X., Zhang, W., Scheffran, J., 2021. Policy-oriented versus market- 
induced: factors influencing crop diversity across China. Ecol. Econ. 190, 107184. 
van den Berg, M.M., Hengsdijk, H., Wolf, J., van Ittersum, M.K., Guanghuo, W., 
Roetter, P.R., 2007. The impact of increasing farm size and mechanization on rural 
income and rice production in Zhejiang province. China. Agric. Syst. 94, 841–850. 
van Oort, P.A.J., Wang, G., Vos, J., Meinke, H., Li, B., Huang, J., van der Werf, W., 2016. 
Towards groundwater neutral cropping systems in the alluvial fans of the North 
China plain. Agri. Water Manag. 165, 131–140. 
Wang, X., Chen, P., Sui, P., Yan, X., Gao, W., 2017a. Preliminary analysis on economic 
and environmental consequences of grain production on different farm sizes in North 
China plain. Agric. Syst. 153, 181–189. 
Wang, X., Li, Z., Long, P., Yan, L., Gao, W., Chen, Y., Sui, P., 2017b. Sustainability 
evaluation of recycling in agricultural systems by emergy accounting. Resour. 
Conserv. Recycl. 117, 114–124. 
Woodhouse, P., 2010. Beyond industrial agriculture? Some questions about farm size, 
productivity and sustainability. J. Agrar. Change 10, 437–453. 
Xu, D., Deng, X., Guo, S., Liu, F., 2019. Labour migration and farmland abandonment in 
rural China: empirical results and policy implimications. J. Environ. Manage. 232, 
738–750. 
Xu, Z., Li, F., Cheng, J., Liang, Z., Groot, C.J., van der Werf, W., 2024. Survey data on 
livelihoods and inputs and outputs of crop prodcution activitives in Quzhou county 
on the North China Plain (Manuscript in preparation).

Z. Xu et al.

Agricultural Systems 216 (2024) 103896

14

Yamauchi, F., 2016. Rising real wages, mechanization and growing advantage of large 
farms: evidence from Indonesia. Food Policy 58, 62–69. 
Yang, R., Luo, X., Xu, Q., Zhang, X., Wu, J., 2021. Measuring the impact of the multiple 
cropping index of cultivated land during continuous and rapid rise of urbanization in 
China: a study from 2000 to 2015. Land 10, 491. 
Yang, X., Xue, X., Zhang, Y., Ren, S., Zhang, C., 2021a. Planting structure changes and 
the driving factors in North China plain from 1971 to 2015 - taking Quzhou county 
as an example. Chin. J. Agri. Res. Regional Planning 42, 90–98 (in Chinese).  
Yang, X., Steenhuis, T.S., Davis, K.F., van der Werf, W., Ritsema, C.J., Pacenka, S., 
Zhang, F.S., Siddique, K.H.M., Du, T.S., 2021b. Diversified crop rotations enhance 
groundwater and economic sustainability of food production. Food Energy Secur. 10, 
e311. 
Yu, Y., Hu, Y., Gu, B., Reis, S., Yang, L., 2021. Reforming smallholder farms to mitigate 
agricultural pollution. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 29, 13869–13880.

Zhang, L., Dong, Y., Liu, C., Bai, Y., 2018. Off-farm employment over the past four 
decades in rural China. China Agric. Econ. Rev. 10, 190–214. 
Zhang, C., Ju, X., Powlson, D., Oenema, O., Smith, P., 2019. Nitrogen surplus 
benchmarks for controlling N pollution in the main cropping systems of China. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 53, 6678–6687. 
Zhang, W., Qian, C., Carlson, K.M., Ge, X., Wang, X., Chen, X., 2021. Increasing farm size 
to improve energy use efficiency and sustainability in maize production. Food 
Energy Secur. 10, E271. 
Zhao, X., Zheng, Y., Huang, X., Kwan, M.P., Zhao, Y., 2017. The effect of urbanization 
and farmland transfer on the spatial patterns of non-grain farmland in China. 
Sustainability 9, 1438. 
Zou, J., Yang, Y., Shi, S., Li, W., Zhao, X., Huang, J., Zhang, H., Liu, K., Harrison, M.T., 
Chen, F., Yin, X., 2022. Farm-scale practical strategies to reduce carbon footprint and 
energy while increasing economic benefits in crop production in the North China 
plain. J. Clea. Prod. 283, 108526.

Z. Xu et al.