Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
211

nature food

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x
Article
A systematic review of the methodology of 
trade-off analysis in agriculture

Timo S. Breure 
  1, Natalia Estrada-Carmona 
  2, Athanasios Petsakos 
  3, 
Elisabetta Gotor 
  3, Boris Jansen 
  4 & Jeroen C. J. Groot 
  1

Trade-off analysis (TOA) is central to policy and decision-making aimed at 
promoting sustainable agricultural landscapes. Yet, a generic methodological 
framework to assess trade-offs in agriculture is absent, largely due to the wide 
range of research disciplines and objectives for which TOA is used. In this 
study, we systematically reviewed 119 studies that have implemented TOAs in 
landscapes and regions dominated by agricultural systems around the world. 
Our results highlight that TOAs tend to be unbalanced, with a strong emphasis 
on productivity rather than environmental and socio-cultural services. TOAs 
have mostly been performed at farm or regional scales, rarely considering 
multiple spatial scales simultaneously. Mostly, TOAs fail to include 
stakeholders at study development stage, disregard recommendation 
uncertainty due to outcome variability and overlook risks associated with 
the TOA outcomes. Increased attention to these aspects is critical for TOAs to 
guide agricultural landscapes towards sustainability.

Contemporary agriculture should not only provide food, fibre, feed 
and fuel but also environmental and socio-economic benefits for rural 
communities and beyond1. To ensure that agriculture delivers multi-
ple services while minimizing its negative impacts, society must be 
aware of the trade-offs and synergies that may arise. The nature of 
these trade-offs depends on location-specific natural, social and cul-
tural conditions that place constraints on the inputs and outputs of an 
agricultural system. For example, market-based farmers are concerned 
with enhancing commodity production, whereas the priority of subsist-
ence farmers lies with improving food security2. The global imperative 
to achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
underscores the need to reduce the environmental impact of land use 
practices and strengthen equitable social outcomes at both landscape 
and community levels. However, achieving the SDGs might require 
sacrifices to primary productivity and economic revenues. Thus, to 
reconcile the demands of agriculture and inform decision-making, an 
analysis is required of potential trade-offs measured against agronomic, 
environmental, economic and social indicators3.
Trade-off analysis (TOA) was established as a concept to gen-
erate quantitative information on competing (trade-offs) or

complementary (synergies) indicators that can be used to guide 
policy and decision-making4. A typical TOA project starts with three 
preparatory steps: formulation of the research question, identifica-
tion of which indicators to assess, and formulation of hypotheses 
about the relationships between the indicators and the associated 
trade-offs and synergies. Subsequently, the management, policy or 
technological changes that affect the TOA indicators can be identi-
fied and included in the analysis framework. Then, the trade-offs and 
synergies under changing conditions or scenarios can be quantified 
and, finally, the results are communicated to relevant stakeholders 
to inform decision-making and policy4. Since its first implementation 
in the context of agriculture, a wide range of methods have been used 
to conduct TOAs, including optimization, simulations, qualitative, 
econometric and narrative-based approaches. In some cases, these 
approaches are deployed in a spatially explicit manner with the support 
of geographic information systems (GIS)5.
Although important advances have been made regarding TOA 
in agricultural contexts, researchers have expressed concerns about 
the scope and methodological limitations of published studies. These 
concerns relate to the limited transfer of the academic knowledge

Received: 25 August 2022

Accepted: 15 January 2024

Published online: 5 March 2024

Check for updates

1Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands. 2Bioversity International, Montpellier, France.

3Bioversity International, Rome, Italy. 4Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

e-mail: jeroen.groot@wur.nl

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
212

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

(1) indicators relevant to environmental and socio-economic services, 
(2) multiple spatial scales and their interactions, (3) the comprehensive 
involvement of stakeholders, and (4) the validity of trade-offs and 
recommendations in the context of associated uncertainties and risks 
(see Table 1 for further details). Finally, a cluster analysis shows which 
indicators were frequently studied together and which TOA methods 
were associated with each cluster.
The aim of this study was thus to provide an overview of the 
peer-reviewed literature on TOA in the context of agriculture using 
a systematic approach. For this purpose, we sought to define how 
trade-offs in agriculture are conceptualized, characterized and ana-
lysed in the TOA literature. Based on these findings, we have identified 
common gaps in the implementation of TOA.

Results
The distribution of publication dates for the articles in the sample was 
mainly centred in the years 2015–2021 (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Specifi-
cally, 73% of the articles were published after 2014, which indicates an 
increasing research effort directed towards TOAs in an agricultural 
context (Extended Data Fig. 1b).

Common interrelationships and co-occurrences among TOA 
indicators
The articles examined included a median of 3.8 ± 1.9 (s.d.) TOA indi-
cators, ranging from 1 to 10. Based on the cumulative distribution, 
52% of the articles included three or fewer TOA indicators, while 90% 
included six or fewer TOA indicators (Extended Data Fig. 2a). The most 
prevalent indicators across all articles were ‘profitability’ (57%, eco-
nomic), ‘yield’ (44%, agronomic) and ‘water quantity’ (34%, sustainable 
resource management). The second most common set of indicators 
encompassed a selection of biophysical (for example, ‘water quality’ 
and ‘greenhouse gases’), agronomic (for example, ‘input efficiency’ and 
‘land use efficiency’) and economic indicators (for example, ‘assets’),

generated by TOA into decision- and policy-making due to the inability 
to take into account social and cultural factors6, the sparsity of multi- 
and cross-scale assessments3,5–7, and the limited representation of 
uncertainty8,9 and risk analysis5.
The concerns reported in the literature on the limitations of TOA 
analysis can indeed have important implications. First, failure to rec-
ognize the importance of scale (spatial, temporal, jurisdictional and 
legislative) in TOA may lead to erroneous inferences on how the rela-
tionships between trade-offs and indicators develop across scales. 
Multiple scales can be analysed without interactions between them or 
a cross-scale analysis can be performed that accounts for interactions 
between scales10. Furthermore, adverse effects appearing outside the 
TOA case study area (off-site effects) may offset any gains stemming 
from a TOA-informed policy11. Second, recognition of social interac-
tions and cultural values is needed to assure representation of ben-
eficiaries and non-beneficiaries relevant to the topic at hand, that is, 
distributional justice9,10. Representation among stakeholders and their 
involvement in the design and implementation of a TOA can increase 
the legitimacy of its findings, assure that the data used are relevant to 
the context and thus enhance adoption of a study’s findings12. Third, 
validation and acknowledgement of uncertainty in both data and model 
estimates increase the robustness of a TOA and can facilitate risk-based 
decision-making13–15.
Previous literature reviews on TOA in agriculture adopted a ‘story-
telling’ approach, where key studies were selected from the literature 
to discuss research trends. However, given the wide scope of TOAs 
applied in the context of agriculture, a systematic review could reveal 
the variety of approaches used and potential knowledge gaps, as well 
as the indicators that were studied and by which methods, ultimately 
facilitating the comparability of results.
Here we report on the TOA indicators, methodology and analysis 
used in 119 peer-reviewed articles. Descriptive statistics are used to 
characterize articles based on the extent to which they considered

Table 1 | A generic description of the criteria that were logged during this systematic review

Criterion
Generic description

TOA method
The method (spatially explicit simulation (M1), simulation (M2), optimization (M3), cost–benefit analysis (M4), econometrics (M5), 
qualitative (M6), literature review (M7), GIS (M8) and other (M9)) applied in the case study

TOA scale
The spatial scale (field, farm, regional, national, multi-country and global) of the case study area for which the TOA is performed

Discipline
The spatial scale (the same spatial scales as for the TOA criterion) at which modelling was performed or data were collected in the 
six disciplines relevant to agricultural production and the provision of services (crop, livestock, economic, environment, fisheries 
and forestry)

TOA indicators
Indicators that were assessed in the TOA: 24 indicators were logged within the generic classes of agronomic (A: yield, yield 
stability, self-sufficiency, land use efficiency and input efficiency), economic (E: profitability, poverty, market supply or demand, 
labour productivity and assets), human health (H: nutrition, health, gender equity, food security and empowerment) and 
sustainable resource management (S: water quantity, water quality, soil nutrients, soil erosion, soil organic carbon, land use, 
greenhouse gases, energy and biodiversity)

Stakeholder type inclusion
Whether, and if so which, stakeholders were included in the case study (local beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries (Lb), experts 
(Ex), government (Gv), farmers (Fm), distant beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries (Db), academics (Ac), private sector (Pv) and 
environmental organizations (Eo))

Stakeholder implementation
How the stakeholders were included in the case study (validation (Vd), valuation (Va), co-development (Cd) and consultation (Co))

Scenario
Whether a scenario was considered in the case study and, if so, which type of scenario (climate (1), policy (2), behavioural (3), 
demographic (4), economic (5), resource use (6), other (7) and none (8))

System border
Whether biophysical or administrative boundaries were used to define the TOA case study area

Off-site
Whether off-site effects (those occurring outside the case study area) were considered in the TOA

Uncertainty
Whether uncertainty has been acknowledged and accounted for

Validation
Whether a validation was performed of the results obtained by data collection, the modelling procedure or the outcomes and 
recommendations from the TOA

Risk analysis
Whether the inference from the TOA and associated recommendations account for risk

Cross-scale analysis
Whether models address cross-scale TOA by summing or aggregation from lower to higher levels (aggregative) or by 
simultaneous quantification at multiple levels (interactive)

For further details, see Supplementary Table 1.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
213

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

ranging between 13% and 21% (Fig. 1). The remaining TOA indicators 
were used less frequently and related to economic (that is, ‘labour pro-
ductivity’ and ‘poverty’), human health (for example, ‘nutrition’, ‘health’ 
or ‘food security’) and agronomic (that is, ‘self-sufficiency’) aspects, 
representing a share of 5–6% (Fig. 1). Rarely considered TOA indica-
tors (less than 5%) included ‘market supply or demand’ (economic), 
‘yield stability’ (agronomic), ‘empowerment’ and ‘gender equity’ (both 
human health; Fig. 1).
The articles were grouped into 11 clusters, depending on which 
TOA indicators were assessed (left y-axis dendrogram in Fig. 2). These 
clusters show a dominant theme based on the co-occurrence of TOA 
indicators (right y-axis in Fig. 2). For example, in cluster 7, ‘poverty’ 
was studied in conjunction with ‘soil nutrients’, whereas in cluster 5, 
‘poverty’ was studied in conjunction with ‘profitability’, ‘food security’ 
and ‘nutrition’. The clustering of articles by TOA indicator reveals which 
TOA indicators are often studied together. Indicators of ‘profitability’ 
and ‘yield’ were the most commonly used (Figs. 1 and 2) and were gener-
ally combined with case-specific environmental and social indicators 
(Fig. 2). This suggests that agronomic and economic viability are con-
ditional for the exploration of improvements in agricultural system 
sustainability. The cluster with the largest number of articles (cluster 6, 
Fig. 2) concerned agricultural production and water quality. This high-
lights the strong focus on solving pressing issues related to pollution 
by surplus nutrients from fertilizers and manure.
The clustering of TOA indicators (top x-axis dendrogram in Fig. 2) 
shows that for 50% of the indicators, the indicator closest in the den-
drogram belongs to the same category (sustainable resource manage-
ment, agronomic, economic or human health). In particular, four out

of five human health indicators were studied in isolation from other 
indicators, forming closely paired branches (top x-axis dendrogram, 
orange colour, in Fig. 2).
The application of TOA methods varied across different TOA indi-
cators and clusters. For example, the TOA indicators ‘labour productiv-
ity’, ‘empowerment’, ‘gender equity’ and ‘yield stability’ lacked cases 
involving spatially explicit methods (M1 or M8; Fig. 1). This same obser-
vation applies to the clusters in which these TOA indicators belong 
(Fig. 3). While the absence of spatially explicit methods for social indi-
cators such as ‘empowerment’ and ‘gender equity’ is expected, given 
that their spatial dimension is often disregarded, it is worth noting 
that gender and empowerment may relate to the spatial distribution 
of fields and resources in the landscape. For instance, their distance 
from the location of the homestead or decision-making processes 
regarding the (distribution of) use and ownership of these resources. 
Clusters of articles associated with ‘yield’, ‘energy’, ‘biodiversity’ and 
‘land use’ exhibited a high use of GIS (M8), qualitative (M6) and other 
(M9) methods, with fewer articles applying optimization methods (M3; 
Fig. 3). Lastly, an interesting anomaly is the ‘health’ indicator, where 
methods M1–M3, encompassing (spatially explicit) simulations and 
optimization methods, were conspicuously absent (Fig. 1).

Frequency of criteria levels
The majority of TOAs were conducted at regional (65%) and farm 
(17%) scales, followed by field (7%) and national (6%) scales. The TOAs 
conducted at multi-country (4%) and global scales, along with ‘other’, 
accounted for only a small proportion of the analyses (Fig. 4a). The 
spatial scales for TOAs differed from the scales at which modelling

H3: Gender equity

H5: Empowerment

A2: Yield stability

E3: Market supply or demand

H4: Food security

A3: Self-suﬀiciency

H2: Health

H1: Nutrition

E2: Poverty

E4: Labour productivity

E5: Assets

S4: Soil erosion

A4: Land use eﬀiciency

A5: Input eﬀiciency

S9: Biodiversity

S8: Energy

S3: Soil nutrients

S5: Soil organic carbon

S6: Land use

S7: Greenhouse gases

S2: Water quality

S1: Water quantity

A1: Yield

E1: Profitability

0
25
50
75
100

Percentage of articles

TOA method
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9

Fig. 1 | Articles that include TOA indicators. Percentage of articles that include 
a TOA indicator (black dotted line and circles) and the share of each TOA method 
M1–M9 used to study that indicator (coloured bars). The prefixes of the TOA

indicators refer to their class association (A, E, H, S) and number of occurrence 
within that class as provided in Table 1. Table 1 also describes the TOA methods 
M1–M9.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
214

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

was performed or data were collected, with the farm and field scale 
contributing to a combined share of 48%. Of the articles considered, 
12% implemented cross-scale analyses and 17% considered off-site 
effects (Fig. 4a). Case study areas were predominantly delineated using 
administrative borders (54%), followed by biophysical delineation 
(24%), with 18% of the articles using both methods (Fig. 4b).
Including a scenario in the TOA allows investigation of the effect 
of a postulated event or driver on the TOA indicators. In our analysis, 
scenarios focusing on climate, behavioural or demographic change 
accounted for 14% of the articles, while scenarios involving alterna-
tive intensities of resource use constituted 37% of the articles. Sce-
narios were absent in 25% of the articles (Fig. 4b). Over half of the 
articles included stakeholders in their analysis, with a relatively equal 
spread across stakeholder types, except for ‘distant beneficiaries and 
non-beneficiaries’, which were under-represented. Farmers and experts 
constituted a larger share (48%) compared to other categories (Fig. 4c). 
Stakeholders were mainly involved in consultation and valuation, with 
co-development and validation implemented in less than 25% of the 
articles considered (Fig. 4c). Overall, the robustness of the TOA results 
was not widely considered, as the criteria ‘uncertainty’ and ‘validation’ 
were logged for less than 50% of the articles. Articles incorporating risk 
analysis constituted 12% of the sample (Fig. 4d).

Links between spatial scales and criteria
Of the articles considered, ‘livestock’, ‘fisheries’ and ‘forestry’ accounted 
for a relatively small share (16%) compared with ‘crop’, ‘economic’ 
and ‘environmental’ disciplines. For the livestock discipline, model-
ling and data collection were predominantly carried out at the farm 
scale, while for forestry, they were primarily conducted at the field or 
regional scale (Fig. 4e). For the economic discipline, modelling and 
data collection were evenly distributed between the farm (n = 34) and

regional (n = 34) scales (Fig. 4e), in contrast to the overall share of these 
scales across all of the articles, where ‘regional’ constituted 65% and 
‘farm’ constituted 17% of the articles (Fig. 4a). In general, for a large 
share of the reviewed articles, data were collected and modelling was 
performed at the field and farm scales, but the TOA was conducted 
at the regional scale. These findings show that, before the TOA, some 
form of aggregation occurs in the majority of the reviewed articles. 
Regarding the spatial scale at which the TOA was conducted for articles 
including a scenario, two observations can be made. First, all of the 
scenarios (except the resource use scenario) were rarely studied at 
scales larger than the national scale. Second, the climate, behavioural 
and demographic change scenarios were almost exclusively studied at 
the regional scale (Fig. 4f). These results show that few studies inves-
tigated how scenarios unfolding at smaller or larger scales affect the 
indicators at the TOA scale.

Multi-scale, cross-scale and robustness criteria
Figure 5 shows the percentage of articles that include a TOA indica-
tor (black line, the same as shown in Fig. 1). The articles were then 
divided into subsets according to whether they included a cross-scale, 
multi-scale or robustness criterion. The coloured lines represent the 
percentage of articles in the subset that include a specific TOA indi-
cator. With the exception of indicators rarely included in all articles 
(for example, those related to nutrition or health), most TOA indica-
tors were present in articles adopting a cross-scale modelling frame-
work (Fig. 5a). These findings occur despite the overall low number 
of articles (<20%) reporting cross-scale analyses (Fig. 5a). Notably, 
articles applying an interactive modelling framework did not include 
‘water quality’, ‘soil erosion’, ‘soil organic carbon’ and ‘biodiversity’, 
despite these indicators having a relatively high frequency across 
all articles (Fig. 5a).

Profitability

Yield

Water quantity

Energy

GHG

SOC

Soil nutrients

Land use eﬀiciency

Input eﬀiciency

Market supp./dem.

Land use

Biodiversity

Water quality

Labour productivity

Soil erosion

Self-suﬀiciency

Assets

Yield stability

Food security

Nutrition

Poverty

Gender equity

Empowerment

Health

TOA indicator clusters

Articles clustered by TOA indicators

TOA indicator category

Agronomic

Economic

Human health
Sustainable resources

Soil nutrients, poverty

Profitability, food security,
nutrition, poverty
Profitability, GHG, nutrients,
assets

Agricultural eﬀiciency,
productivity, profitability

Profitability, water quantity,
biodiversity

Profitability, yield, land use,
water quality

Water quantity and quality,
yield, SOC, soil erosion

Agricultural eﬀiciency and
productivity, GHG, SOC

Yield, energy,
market supp./dem., assets

Land use, biodiversity,
water quality

Water quantity, energy,
market supp./dem., land use

E1
A1
S1
S8
S7
S5
S3
A4
A5
E3
S6
S9
S2
H2
E4
S4
A3
E5
A2
H4
H1
E2
H3
H5
7

5

1

10

11

6

2

8

9

4

3

Fig. 2 | Clustering of articles. The articles were clustered by TOA indicator 
(row-wise) and TOA indicator clusters (column-wise). The associations of articles 
with clusters are indicated by the colours and labels on the left of the figure; the 
colours are arbitrary. TOA indicator clusters (top x axis) are specified by colour, 
corresponding to the main indicator categories (legend in top left of the figure),

and their name (bottom x axis). The matrix indicates whether a TOA indicator 
has been included in an article (red) or not (beige). The labels on the right list the 
main TOA indicators included in each cluster. GHG, greenhouse gases; SOC, soil 
organic carbon; supp./dem., supply or demand.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
215

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

Across all articles, 17% considered off-site effects (Fig. 4a). Nota-
bly, the ‘poverty’ and ‘soil erosion’ indicators were under-represented 
in articles considering off-site effects (Fig. 5b). Eight indicators were 
excluded in articles considering multiple spatial scales in modelling or 
data collection (‘discipline’ in Fig. 5b). This finding is particularly strik-
ing for ‘biodiversity’, given that it constitutes a large share of spatially 
explicit TOA methods (Fig. 1).
Thirteen per cent of articles reported TOA on multiple spatial 
scales, with seven indicators excluded in these cases (‘TOA’ in Fig. 5b). 
Among the excluded indicators, those related to human health domi-
nated (except for ‘nutrition’). For certain indicators, these findings are 
to be expected. For instance, market supply or demand (economic) 
is irrelevant at low geographical scales (field and farm) as prices are 
determined at the regional (local), national or international scale. The 
articles that included a risk analysis showed stark contrasts between 
TOA indicators with respect to their representation relative to all 
articles. Economic and human health indicators were particularly 
over-represented, while ‘yield’, ‘input efficiency’ and a set of biophysi-
cal indicators were under-represented (Fig. 5c). For articles in which 
uncertainty was acknowledged or validation was performed, no indica-
tors were over- or under-represented relative to their inclusion across 
all articles (Fig. 5c).

Discussion
Limitations on the inclusion of TOA indicators
Recent reviews on TOA have stated that there is little to no represen-
tation of indicators related to social interactions, justice and gender 
issues in TOAs for agricultural systems5,6. These studies referred in 
particular to intra-household equity, asset ownership, health, education 
and nutrition. Our results also demonstrate that social and cultural TOA 
indicators are largely absent, mostly considered in isolation and studied 
by statistical approaches. These findings are probably a result of the 
limited data availability and the inability of TOA methods to include

socio-cultural indicators for features and processes that are difficult 
to capture quantitatively16,17. We further note a similarly low frequency 
for the following indicators: food security, self-sufficiency and yield 
stability. These findings raise questions about the rationale behind the 
selection of TOA indicators. That is, the prevalent use of profitability 
and crop yield as primary indicators reflects the focus on profit and 
crop yield maximization in the literature5. The outcomes and priorities 
of a TOA depend on the chosen objectives and indicators. Alternative 
indicators might therefore facilitate a more comprehensive analysis of 
the delivery of environmental, economic and socio-cultural services 
from agriculture. One illustrative example is the metric ‘nutritional 
yield’, defined as “the number of hectares required to provide sufficient 
quantity to fulfil 100% of dietary reference intake for a nutrient for 
one adult”2. Nutritional yield thus allows the assessment of land use 
efficiency in both agronomic and social terms. Integrating nutritional 
yield into TOA in the context of subsistence agriculture could unveil 
the need for changes in farmers’ crop plans to balance food security 
and economic profitability objectives.

TOA methodologies
The formulation of research objectives, questions and methodology 
determines the information base that a TOA can provide16,18. Decisions 
regarding TOA objectives and methodology determine the degree 
to which scales, disciplines and indicators are compartmentalized. 
In addition, these decisions influence the range of interventions and 
scenarios explored for alternative agro-environmental management of 
land, resources and technologies7,18. The results of our analysis reveal 
associations between TOA methods and indicators, indicating com-
mon gaps, such as the absence of articles reporting the use of spatially 
explicit methods to study the indicators ‘human health’ and ‘yield sta-
bility’. Studying these indicators in a spatially explicit manner could 
allow for targeted land use planning at the local scale. For instance, 
Prestele and Verburg demonstrated that spatially explicit analysis

Cluster 3
(n = 12)

Cluster 4
(n = 10)

Cluster 9
(n = 10)

Cluster 8
(n = 13)

Cluster 2
(n = 11)

Cluster 6
(n = 17)

Cluster 11
(n = 12)

Cluster 1
(n = 12)

Cluster 10
(n = 8)

Cluster 5
(n = 9)

Cluster 7
(n = 5)

0
25
50
75
100
Percentage of articles

TOA method
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9

Fig. 3 | The share of each TOA method by cluster. Cluster associations are as per Fig. 2 and the number of articles within each cluster is given by n.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
216

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

of climate-smart agriculture adoptions unveils local-scale trade-offs 
affecting yield and soil carbon sequestration at an aggregated scale19. 
Our results also underscore expected patterns, with socio-economic 
indicators predominantly studied through statistical approaches and 
qualitative methods. These methods, static and based on existing data-
sets, differ from mechanistic models, which allow extrapolation and ex 
ante assessment under alternative future scenarios. Simulations based 
on mechanistic models hold the potential to explore scenarios that 
minimize trade-offs between indicators3,7. However, the validity of this 
kind of optimization depends on having sufficient understanding of 
relevant processes and feedbacks in the socio-environmental system3. 
For example, while crop models vary in their capacity to assess climate 
change impacts, they share common limitations, such as inadequate 
representation of low-intensity agricultural systems20. We found that 
a description of study limitations in the context of the TOA framework, 
for example, excluded aspects, was often absent. Ideally, models and 
associated uncertainties would be assessed in the design phase of the 
TOA. This could ensure the availability of adequate information for 
quantifying all desired parameters at the desired resolution, allow-
ing the study to comprehensively represent the agricultural system.

Such an approach is crucial to guide planning in future management 
decisions aligned with research objectives17.

Involvement of stakeholders and practical application of TOA 
results
One recurring concern in the literature is the frequent omission of 
stakeholders at the onset of the TOA, potentially limiting the prac-
tical application of TOA results6,8. Our findings partially support 
these concerns, given that co-development with stakeholders was 
observed in only 10% of the articles. However, making a definitive 
statement on equal representation among stakeholders proved 
challenging as there was generally an absence of a systematic 
inventory outlining the relevance of different stakeholders to the 
decision-making process based on their interests and influence21. 
Our analysis shows that farmers and experts were the primary stake-
holders included in the articles. Nonetheless, the omission of distant 
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries is noteworthy as they are likely 
to be relevant to the decision-making process in numerous cases, 
especially when off-site effects are considered in TOAs conducted 
on multiple scales.

0
25
50

Percentage of articles

75
100

Cross-scale

Discipline

Oﬀ-site

TOA

Scenario

System border

TOA method

Implementation

Inclusion

Type

Risk analysis

Uncertainty

Validation

0
0
0

0
0
4

27
25
47
6
3
0

3
15
6

13
34
34
5
4
1

26
24
55
6
3
1

1
1
0

11
1
14
4
1
0

Crop

Economic

Environmental

Fisheries

Forestry

Livestock

Field
Farm
Regional
National Multi–country
Global

Scale

Discipline

0

0

11

1

0

0

0

1

5

18

2

0

1

0

0

0

3

1

0

0

0

0

1

6

1

0

0

0

1

6

16

1

0

0

0

3

13

43

5

1

1

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

5

7

25

3

5

0

1

Field

Farm

Regional

National

Multi–country

Global

Other

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Scenario

TOA scale

e

f

3
4
5 6

3

1
2

1
2

1
2
3
4
56

3
4
5

3 4
5

1
2
6
7
8
9

1
2
6
7
8

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

Administrative
Biophysical
Both

Other

Lb
Ex
Gv
Fm
Db
Ac
Pv
Eo

Co
Cd
Va
Vd

Scale
a

TOA framework
b

Stakeholder
c

TOA robustness
d

Fig. 4 | The relative frequency of each level within a criterion. a, Criteria 
related to the scale of the analysis. TOA: the spatial scale at which the TOA was 
conducted. The numbers refer to the spatial scales of field (1), farm (2), regional 
(3), national (4), multi-country (5) and global (6). Off-site: whether off-site effects 
have been considered in the TOA. Discipline: the spatial scale at which modelling 
or data collection was performed for a discipline. The numbers refer to the spatial 
scales detailed above for TOA. Cross-scale: whether aggregative (1), interactive 
(2) or no cross-scale modelling was performed (3). b, Criteria related to the TOA 
framework. TOA method: the methods used to perform the TOAs. The numbers 
refer to the TOA methods M1–M9 defined in Table 1. System border: which 
boundaries were used to define the TOA case study area. Scenario: whether the 
article considered a scenario and, if so, which type of scenario. The numbers refer

to the scenarios 1–8 defined in Table 1. c, Criteria related to stakeholders. Type: 
whether local beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries, experts, government, farmers, 
distant beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries, academics, private organizations 
or environmental organizations were involved. Inclusion: whether the study 
included stakeholders. Implementation: whether stakeholders were involved 
in consultation, co-development, valuation or validation. d, Criteria related 
to TOA robustness: whether the article performed a validation, risk analysis 
or acknowledged uncertainty. e, The frequency (shown in the circles) for each 
spatial scale at which the modelling or data collection was performed for a given 
discipline. f, The frequency (shown in the circles) at which an article considered 
a given scenario in TOA for each spatial scale. The scenario numbers 1–8 are 
defined in Table 1.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
217

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

Multi- and cross-scale analysis
Depending on the research objectives, the TOA literature underscores 
the importance of acknowledging processes across scales and includ-
ing them in research3,6–9,22. In many of the articles, data were collected 
or modelling was performed at field and farm scales, yet the TOA was 
conducted at the regional scale. This highlights an opportunity for 
multi-scale TOA analysis, potentially enhancing the relevance of TOA 
studies to policy. For example, bilevel optimization is a promising 
approach to facilitating nested decision-making processes at different 
scales. In this approach, the solution at the higher level (for example, 
larger spatial scale) depends on the solution at the lower level (for exam-
ple, smaller spatial scale). Bostian et al. demonstrated the application 
of this methodology in recognizing multiple spatial scales inherent to 
non-point pollution regulation23. However, the restricted application 
of cross-scale analysis in our sample (12%) shows the limited extent to 
which TOA in agriculture captures the hierarchical nature of social, 
cultural, environmental, economic and agronomic processes.
Furthermore, 17% of the articles considered effects outside the TOA 
case study area, considering off-site effects in a diverse array of subjects, 
including transnational emission permits, water trading and increased 
demand for scarce resources, anticipated to influence their shadow 
prices24–26. However, off-site effects might have feedbacks, such as 
dependencies between alternative production systems within a supply

chain27. In such cases, the delineation of the system boundary must be 
considered in the context of these feedbacks to ensure their inclusion 
within the system. In cases where off-site effects do not have feedbacks, 
these can be classified as ‘teleconnections’, denoting processes whose 
cause and effect are widely separated28. A case in point is a study of the 
water quality of the Danube River, in which distant beneficiaries and 
non-beneficiaries, represented by an international committee, were 
considered in the TOA29. The results also show that climate, behavioural 
and demographic scenarios were rarely assessed at lower or higher 
scales (compared to the regional scale). This underscores that the extent 
to which these scales are relevant to TOA is understudied and merits 
further research. For example, generic methods, such as the carbon30 
or water31 footprint, can provide a broad assessment of which off-site 
effects at larger scales are relevant to TOA outcomes. These approaches 
may facilitate the inclusion of underlying causes, the involvement of 
more inclusive stakeholders and account for leakage effects, such as 
the expansion of agricultural lands beyond the TOA case study area32.
Ideally, a TOA methodological framework is conceptualized such 
that (1) it recognizes multi- and cross-scale interactions where appli-
cable, (2) the system boundary aligns with substantiated biophysical 
and relevant socio-institutional boundaries, and (3) it recognizes the 
heterogeneity in which scales and associated consequences are per-
ceived as well as valued by different stakeholders10.

0

10

20

30

40

50

60
Cross-scale

All articles
Aggregative
(n = 9)
Interactive
(n = 6)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60
Multi-scale

All articles
TOA
(n = 16)
Discipline
(n = 12)
Oﬀ-site
(n = 20)

a

b

c

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

E1: Profitability

A1: Yield

S1: Water quantity

S2: Water quality

S7: Greenhouse gases

S6: Land use

S5: Soil organic carbon

S3: Soil nutrients

S8: Energy

S9: Biodiversity

A5: Input eﬀiciency

A4: Land use eﬀiciency

S4: Soil erosion

E5: Assets

E4: Labour productivity

E2: Poverty

H1: Nutrition

H2: Health

A3: Self-suﬀiciency

H4: Food security

E3: Market supply or demand

A2: Yield stability

H5: Empowerment

H3: Gender equity

Robustness

All articles
Risk analysis
(n = 14)
Uncertainty
(n = 55)
Validation
(n = 50)

Percentage of articles
Percentage of articles
Percentage of articles

TOA indicator

Fig. 5 | Percentage of articles that include a TOA indicator. The percentages 
of all reviewed articles and subsets of articles that include specific TOA 
indicators. a–c, The subsets comprise articles that included cross-scale (a), 
multi-scale (b) and robustness (c) criteria. In b, TOA refers to articles in which

the TOA was conducted on multiple spatial scales, ‘Discipline’ refers to articles 
that considered multiple spatial scales for modelling or data collection, and 
‘Off-site’ refers to articles in which effects outside the TOA case study area were 
considered.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
218

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

Robustness of TOA results
The risk associated with TOA extends across spatial, temporal and 
jurisdictional scales, carrying implications for the dissemination of 
TOA results13. The under-representation of ‘yield’ in articles considering 
risk analysis highlights the dichotomy between yield and profitability 
as the most prominent indicators. That is, risk analysis appears to be 
mainly associated with the economic domain5. However, it is impor-
tant to recognize that the evaluation of risk and the formulation of 
relevant strategies (risk aversion, mitigation or offsetting) are criti-
cal for farmers adopting system transformations, such as alternative 
forms of land use to mitigate inputs and associated greenhouse gas 
emissions. Integrating risk into TOA enables the study of the policies 
and incentives necessary for achieving whole-system transformations 
towards sustainable agricultural practices13,14. Decision-making under 
uncertainty becomes interpretable when recommendations are accom-
panied by an assessment of associated risks. Ideally, these risks are 
context-specific. For example, Hochman et al. provided TOA results 
on crop rotations alongside a minimum risk threshold quantified as 
the highest gross margin for the poorest 20% of years33.
While a moderate number of the articles considered uncertainty, 
only a few articles quantified changes in trade-offs as a function of 
uncertainty. The inclusion of stochastic components and the associated 
uncertainty inherent in biological systems could facilitate a more real-
istic description of outcomes, proving valuable for decision-making13,15. 
Varying input data or model parameterization within an expected 
range could reveal the sensitivity of results. For instance, when climate 
scenarios are used, realizations of these scenarios can be used to assess 
the stochasticity of the objectives for which the TOA is implemented34. 
This approach enables the acknowledgement of both the frequency 
and pattern of stochastic events, including extreme weather events, 
and their impact on TOA outcomes. Consequently, an analysis of the 
adaptability of a farming system would not solely rely on optimal solu-
tions given the mean output but would also account for associated vari-
ability and unexpected events15. However, it is crucial to contextualize 
the effect of stochasticity. For example, the relative impact of model or 
parameter uncertainty on optimization outcomes has been shown to 
vary depending on the prioritization of objectives and site conditions35.

Limitations of this study
An important limitation of our review lies in the use of ‘trade-off analysis’ 
as a single term in our Web of Science search string. There are research 
areas that address trade-offs and synergies across various disciplines, 
scales and methods without explicitly using the term ‘trade-off analy-
sis’ to describe their research objectives. Examples include the ‘food–
energy–water nexus’ literature36, as well as research under the auspices 
of the Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement Project 
(AgMIP) (https://agmip.org/) and the Food, Agriculture, Biodiversity, 
Land-Use and Energy (FABLE) Consortium37. Both AgMIP and FABLE 
are particularly concerned with the relevance of TOA to policy. AgMIP 
explicitly states the use of “multiple scenarios and models to assess 
and probabilistically manage risk”38. Given the focus of these studies 
on global and regional assessments, we anticipate that our findings 
for those spatial scales could be affected. Indeed, the identified gaps 
in TOA implementation need to be viewed in the context of our sample, 
which mostly comprises studies in which modelling or data analysis 
was performed up to the regional level and TOA at the regional scale.
The method used to log the occurrence of pre-set criteria not only 
affects the variance within a criterion but also influences its abundance. 
For example, Sanon et al. included a large number of TOA indicators that 
were all classified under ‘biodiversity’29. Thus, binary criteria logging does 
not capture the intensity with which a criterion is considered, a well-known 
phenomenon in the field of ecology39. This limitation may have resulted in 
the underestimation of both the intensity with which certain TOA indica-
tors and their classes have been studied (Fig. 1) and the total number of 
TOA indicators considered per article (Extended Data Fig. 2).

Conclusions
Based on our analysis, it is possible to identify some actions that 
would increase the contribution of TOAs to SDG-aligned agricultural 
landscapes.
For instance, future studies should include multi- and cross-scale 
effects when relevant to the research objectives. We have identified an 
opportunity for multi-scale analysis, given that many studies aggre-
gated farm- or field-scale data before performing TOA at a regional 
scale. As the inclusion of multiple scales, indicators and methods 
may in some cases reduce the generalizability of results and make 
them more context-specific, an alternative would be to discuss the 
anticipated implications of multi- and cross-scale effects on the 
study findings.
Furthermore, the relevance of TOA to society and policy can be 
improved by formulating research objectives such that TOA indicators 
lie within the scope of frameworks such as the SDGs. The most frequent 
indicators were biophysical or informed by profit maximization theory 
(for example, profitability and yield). However, indicators relevant to 
human well-being, security and farm resilience (for example, empow-
erment, nutrition and yield stability) occurred less frequently. To 
aid the interpretation of TOA results, the rationale behind the TOA 
methodology that is used to assess indicators should be listed together 
with a critical review of how the agricultural system under study is 
represented and what is excluded as a consequence.
In the reviewed articles, the most consulted stakeholders were 
farmers and experts, stakeholder co-development and validation were 
rare, and scenarios were predominantly based on resource use with lit-
tle consideration of off-site effects. These findings suggest that TOAs 
mostly explore alternative management across a set of farms rather 
than policies and incentives that would facilitate whole landscape and 
food system transformations.
Agricultural policy- and decision-making carry an inherent risk. 
TOAs will become more operational when they evaluate associated risks 
and list strategies to manage these risks. This process could promote 
the robustness of quantified trade-offs with respect to the associated 
uncertainty of data and variability in outcomes. Finally, an inventory 
of stakeholders that are relevant to the decision-making process and 
their respective roles in the study would provide legitimacy of results. 
While this element has already been recognized in the literature12,29, 
some of the shortcomings that we have identified here would probably 
occur less frequently, particularly the lack of stakeholder inclusion and 
the over-representation of specific stakeholder types and methods of 
stakeholder engagement.
Closer adherence to these guidelines could enhance the relevance 
of TOA to the scientific community, policy-makers and farmers.

Methods
We followed the approach of Lautenbach et al. and Seppelt et al. in 
their systematic review of the literature on ecosystem services9,22. 
The generic structure involved (1) the identification, screening and 
selection of relevant peer-reviewed literature from a global repository, 
(2) formulation of the criteria against which to evaluate each article 
(Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1), and (3) descriptive statistics and 
cluster analysis to assess common interrelationships between criteria 
and identify knowledge gaps.
We used the following search string “ALL=agricultur* AND (“trade 
off* analysis” OR “trade-off* analysis” OR “tradeoff* analysis”)” in the 
Web of Science (on 14 September 2021) to identify peer-reviewed arti-
cles in English reporting TOA. We found 153 articles with publication 
dates spanning from 1993 to 2021. We excluded studies that mentioned 
the existence of trade-offs but did not assess relationships between 
indicators. For this reason, review and opinion papers were considered 
off-topic and were excluded from the search results. Furthermore, 
methodological papers that did not involve a case study were also 
excluded, leading to a total sample of 119 articles.

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
219

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

We selected criteria based on current TOA research5–9,16,22 and 
recorded information on these criteria that were relevant to the con-
ceptualization, characterization and analysis of trade-offs in agri-
culture (research objective 1). Briefly, the criteria included the type 
of TOA methods used, the spatial scales at which the analyses were 
performed and/or data collected, the indicators assessed in the TOA, 
which stakeholder types were included as well as how the stakehold-
ers were engaged in the case study, whether the case study included 
alternative scenarios and of what type, how the case study area was 
delineated, whether effects outside the case study area were consid-
ered, and whether the case study acknowledged and accounted for 
uncertainty, validated results or performed a risk analysis. To assess 
whether cross-scale analyses were performed in case studies, we 
adopted the definition of Kanter et al., who distinguished between 
model frameworks that aggregate outputs at lower scales to use as 
inputs at higher scales (aggregative) and model frameworks that 
have submodels operating at different spatial and temporal resolu-
tions (interactive)6. Thus, whereas an aggregative model framework 
follows a sequential approach, an interactive model framework per-
forms analysis across scales simultaneously, allowing for interactions 
between scales and emergent indicators at higher levels. Furthermore, 
descriptive information was collected for three criteria: the agricultural 
system(s) studied, agricultural activities and knowledge gaps reported 
in the discussion section of the article. All of the criteria are listed in 
Table 1 with a generic description. We refer the reader to Supplementary 
Table 1 for more detailed information on the criteria. Based on these 
criteria, knowledge gaps were then assessed through descriptive sta-
tistics and cluster analysis (research objective 2).
The decision of which TOA indicators to include is a major 
methodological decision in TOA as it determines which interrelations 
are considered and analysed, and therefore which trade-offs and syner-
gies can be identified. We anticipated thematic clusters of TOA indica-
tors based on the discipline, scale, geography and method considered. 
To identify co-occurrences between TOA indicators, we performed 
hierarchical Ward clustering to group articles by TOA indicators as well 
as the TOA indicators themselves based on the Jaccard similarity coef-
ficient40. Through the use of the Jaccard similarity metric, we accounted 
for the double-zero problem. Namely, the absence of a TOA indicator in 
two articles does not indicate a similarity, whereas its presence does9. 
For the clustering of articles by the TOA indicators used, the number of 
clusters to be retained was decided by the ‘elbow’ method based on the 
Mantel correlation between the data for each cluster and the raw dis-
tance matrix40. For the clustering of TOA indicators, the dendrogram was 
not cut to visualize common co-occurrences for all of the TOA indicators.
Criteria were logged in a Microsoft Office Excel (2021) spreadsheet 
(Supplementary Data 1). The data collected during this systematic 
review were further analysed and visualized in R (ref. 41). Data handling, 
visualizations and analysis were performed using the following R pack-
ages: tidyverse42, dendextend43, cluster44, vegan45 and pheatmap46.

Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Data availability
The dataset created has been made available as extended data.

Code availability
The code created for data handling, analysis and visualizations is 
available on request.

References
1.	
Renting, H. et al. Exploring multifunctional agriculture. A review 
of conceptual approaches and prospects for an integrative 
transitional framework. J. Environ. Manag. 90, 112–123 (2009).

2.	
DeFries, R. et al. Synergies and trade-offs for sustainable 
agriculture: nutritional yields and climate-resilience for cereal 
crops in Central India. Glob. Food Sec. 11, 44–53 (2016).
3.	
Seppelt, R., Lautenbach, S. & Volk, M. Identifying trade-offs 
between ecosystem services, land use, and biodiversity: a plea for 
combining scenario analysis and optimization on different spatial 
scales. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 5, 458–463 (2013).
4.	
Stoorvogel, J. J., Antle, J. M., Crissman, C. C. & Bowen, W. The tradeoff 
analysis model: integrated bio-physical and economic modeling 
of agricultural production systems. Agric. Syst. 80, 43–66 (2004).
5.	
Antle, J. M. & Valdivia, R. O. Trade-off analysis of agri-food systems 
for sustainable research and development. Q Open https://doi.
org/10.1093/qopen/qoaa005 (2021).
6.	
Kanter, D. R. et al. Evaluating agricultural trade-offs in the age of 
sustainable development. Agric. Syst. 163, 73–88 (2018).
7.	
Groot, J. C. J. et al. On the contribution of modelling to 
multifunctional agriculture: learning from comparisons.  
J. Environ. Manag. 90, 147–160 (2009).
8.	
Klapwijk, C. J. et al. Analysis of trade-offs in agricultural systems: 
current status and way forward. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 6, 
110–115 (2014).
9.	
Lautenbach, S. et al. Blind spots in ecosystem services research 
and challenges for implementation. Reg. Environ. Change 19, 
2151–2172 (2019).
10.	 Cash, D. W. et al. Scale and cross-scale dynamics: governance 
and information in a multilevel world. Ecol. Soc. https://www.jstor.
org/stable/26265993 (2006).
11.	
Gibson, R. B. Sustainability assessment: basic components of a 
practical approach. Impact Assess. Proj. Apprais. 24, 170–182 (2006).
12.	 Cash, D. W. et al. Knowledge systems for sustainable 
development. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 8086–8091 (2003).
13.	 Anderson, J. R. Risk in rural development: challenges for 
managers and policy makers. Agric. Syst. 75, 161–197 (2003).
14.	 Hardaker, J. B., Lien, G., Anderson, J. R. & Huirne, R. B. Coping with 
Risk in Agriculture: Applied Decision Analysis (Cabi, 2015).
15.	 Uusitalo, L., Lehikoinen, A., Helle, I. & Myrberg, K. An overview 
of methods to evaluate uncertainty of deterministic models in 
decision support. Environ. Model. Softw. 63, 24–31 (2015).
16.	 Thornton, P. K. et al. A framework for priority-setting in climate 
smart agriculture research. Agric. Syst. 167, 161–175 (2018).
17.	 Jones, J. W. et al. Toward a new generation of agricultural system 
data, models, and knowledge products: state of agricultural 
systems science. Agric. Syst. 155, 269–288 (2017).
18.	 Morrison-Saunders, A. & Pope, J. Conceptualising and managing 
trade-offs in sustainability assessment. Environ. Impact Assess. 
Rev. 38, 54–63 (2013).
19.	 Prestele, R. & Verburg, P. H. The overlooked spatial dimension of 
climate‐smart agriculture. Glob. Change Biol. 26, 1045–1054 (2020).
20.	 Ewert, F. et al. Crop modelling for integrated assessment of risk to 
food production from climate change. Environ. Model. Softw. 72, 
287–303 (2015).
21.	 Norström, A. V. et al. Principles for knowledge co-production in 
sustainability research. Nat. Sustain. 3, 182–190 (2020).
22.	 Seppelt, R., Dormann, C. F., Eppink, F. V., Lautenbach, S. & 
Schmidt, S. A quantitative review of ecosystem service studies: 
approaches, shortcomings and the road ahead. J. Appl. Ecol. 48, 
630–636 (2011).
23.	 Bostian, M., Whittaker, G., Barnhart, B., Fare, R. & Grosskopf, S. 
Valuing water quality tradeoffs at different spatial scales: an 
integrated approach using bilevel optimization. Water Res. Econ. 
11, 1–12 (2015).
24.	 Popp, A. et al. The economic potential of bioenergy for climate 
change mitigation with special attention given to implications for 
the land system. Environ. Res. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/6/3/034017 (2011).

Nature Food | Volume 5 | March 2024 | 211–220
220

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

25.	 Hayha, T., Franzese, P. P., Paletto, A. & Fath, B. D. Assessing, 
valuing, and mapping ecosystem services in Alpine forests. 
Ecosyst. Serv. 14, 12–23 (2015).
26.	 Maraseni, T., An-Vo, D. A., Mushtaq, S. & Reardon-Smith, K. 
Carbon smart agriculture: an integrated regional approach offers 
significant potential to increase profit and resource use efficiency, 
and reduce emissions. J. Clean. Prod. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2020.124555 (2021).
27.	 Modongo, O. & Kulshreshtha, S. N. Economics of mitigating 
greenhouse gas emissions from beef production in western 
Canada. Agric. Syst. 162, 229–238 (2018).
28.	 Kinzig, A. P. in The Princeton Guide to Ecology (eds Levin, S. A. 
et al.) 573–670 (Princeton Univ. Press, 2012).
29.	 Sanon, S., Hein, T., Douven, W. & Winkler, P. Quantifying 
ecosystem service trade-offs: the case of an urban floodplain in 
Vienna, Austria. J. Environ. Manag. 111, 159–172 (2012).
30.	 Wright, L. A., Kemp, S. & Williams, I. ‘Carbon footprinting’: towards 
a universally accepted definition. Carbon Manag. 2, 61–72 (2011).
31.	 Chapagain, A. K. & Hoekstra, A. Y. The water footprint of Morocco and 
the Netherlands: global water use as a result of domestic consumption 
of agricultural commodities. Ecol. Econ. 64, 109–118 (2007).
32.	 Lambin, E. F. & Meyfroidt, P. Global land use change, economic 
globalization, and the looming land scarcity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 108, 3465–3472 (2011).
33.	 Hochman, Z. et al. Cropping system yield gaps can be narrowed 
with more optimal rotations in dryland subtropical Australia. 
Agric. Syst. 184, 102896 (2020).
34.	 Karner, K., Schmid, E., Schneider, U. A. & Mitter, H. Computing 
stochastic Pareto frontiers between economic and environmental 
goals for a semi-arid agricultural production region in Austria. 
Ecol. Econ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107044 (2021).
35.	 Holzkämper, A., Klein, T., Seppelt, R. & Fuhrer, J. Assessing the 
propagation of uncertainties in multi-objective optimization for 
agro-ecosystem adaptation to climate change. Environ. Model. 
Softw. 66, 27–35 (2015).
36.	 D’Odorico, P. et al. The global food–energy–water nexus. Rev. 
Geophys. 56, 456–531 (2018).
37.	 FABLE Consortium. Pathways to Sustainable Land-Use and Food 
Systems. 2020 Report of the FABLE Consortium (International 
Institute of Applied Systems Analysis and Sustainable Development 
Solutions Network, 2020); https://doi.org/10.22022/ESM/ 
12-2020.16896
38.	 Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement Project. 
Approach. Track 2: Climate change multi-model assessment 
AgMIP https://agmip.org/approach-4/ (2023).
39.	 Royle, J. A. & Nichols, J. D. Estimating abundance from repeated 
presence–absence data or point counts. Ecology 84, 777–790 
(2003).
40.	 Legendre, P. & Legendre, L. Numerical Ecology (Elsevier, 2012).
41.	 R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical 
computing. R package version 4.1.2. https://www.R-project.org/ 
(2021).
42.	 Wickham, H. et al. Welcome to the tidyverse. J. Open Source 
Softw. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01686 (2019).
43.	 Galili, T. dendextend: an R package for visualizing, adjusting, and 
comparing trees of hierarchical clustering. Bioinformatics 31, 
3718–3720 (2015).
44.	 Maechler, M., Rousseeuw, P., Struyf, A., Hubert, M. & Hornik, K. 
cluster: Cluster analysis basics and extensions. R package version 
2.1.2 (2021).
45.	 Oksanen, J. et al. vegan: Community ecology package. R package 
version 2.5-7 https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan (2020).

46.	 Kolde, R. pheatmap: Pretty heatmaps. R package version 1.0.12

https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=pheatmap (2019).

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge R. Seppelt for his comments on the initial 
methodology. This work was made possible by the CGIAR Research 
Program on Roots, Tubers and Bananas (RTB) and the One CGIAR 
Initiatives ‘Nexus Gains—Realizing Multiple Benefits Across Water, 
Energy, Food and Ecosystems’ and ‘Nature Positive Solutions’, 
together with all of the donors who supported this research through 
their contributions to the CGIAR and One CGIAR Fund. For a list of One 
CGIAR Fund donors, please see http://www.cgiar.org/our-funders. 
This research was partly funded by the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID; AID-BFS-G-11-00002) as part of the 
US government’s Feed the Future Initiative. The contents of this Article 
are the responsibility of the producing organizations and do not 
necessarily reflect the opinion of USAID or the US government.

Author contributions
T.S.B. conceived and designed the study, led and performed the 
review and data analyses, interpretations and writing. N.E.-C. 
contributed to the study’s design, interpretations and writing. A.P., E.G. 
and B.J. contributed to interpretations and writing. J.C.J.G. contributed 
to the study’s design, analysis, interpretations and writing.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x.

Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary 
material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Jeroen C. J. Groot.

Peer review information Nature Food thanks John Antle and Emma 
Stephens for their contribution to the peer review of this work.

Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2024

Nature Food

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

Extended Data Fig. 1 | Articles per year of publication. Number of articles by publication year (a) and its cumulative distribution (b).

Nature Food

Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-024-00926-x

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Figures on the number of trade-off analysis (TOA) indicators considered. Cumulative distribution of articles per number of TOA indicators 
included within an article (a). Frequency (%) of the number of TOA indicators included within an article, color-coded by cluster as specified in Fig. 2 in the main text (b).

1

nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020

Corresponding author(s):
JCJ Groot, jeroen.groot@wur.nl

Last updated by author(s): Feb 14, 2024

Reporting Summary

Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.

Statistics

For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.

n/a Confirmed

The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement

A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly

The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.

A description of all covariates tested

A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons

A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)

For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.

For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings

For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes

Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated

Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.

Software and code

Policy information about availability of computer code

Data collection
Criteria were logged within a Microsoft Office Excel (2021) sheet which has been made available under as a supplementary dataset.

Data analysis
The data collected during the systematic review has been further analyzed and visualized in R. Data handling, visualizations and analysis were 
done using the following R packages: tidyverse, dendextend, cluster, vegan and pheatmap. Please see the last paragraph in the methodology 
section and references section for further details.

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.

Data

Policy information about availability of data

All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:

- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability

The dataset created has been made available as a supplementary dataset.

2

nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020

Field-specific reporting

Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.

Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
 Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences

For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf

Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences study design

All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.

Study description
A systematic review on trade-off analysis within agriculture.

Research sample
The research sample consisted of all peer-reviewed articles from the Web of Science database that corresponded to our search 
string.

Sampling strategy
We used the following search string: “ALL=agricultur* AND ("trade off* analysis" OR "trade-off* analysis" OR "tradeoff* analysis")” in 
the Web of Science (on 14/09/2021) to identify peer-reviewed articles in English conducting TOA. We found 153 articles with 
publication dates spanning from 1993 to 2021.

Data collection
Criteria to evaluate for each article were defined prior to the review. TB read and evaluated all articles based on criteria. (See meta 
data in data file). Decisions made during evaluation were also logged in the 'Rules' tab in the data file.

Timing and spatial scale
Data collection took place from 15-09-2021 up till 31-01-2022, the date at which all articles had been read and logged.

Data exclusions
Review- and opinion papers were considered off-topic and were excluded from the search results. Furthermore, methodological 
papers that did not involve a case-study were also excluded, leading to a total sample of 119 articles.

Reproducibility
Reproducibility has been facilitated through making the data file accessible together with the notes and decision-making in the data 
file, if required we can also publish the R code used to analyze the data and visualize results.

Randomization
After downloading all the articles, they were evaluated in alphabetical order based on author names.

Blinding
We did not consider blinding applicable to our study. One way in which it could have been would be to blind the authors and their 
affiliation. However, we also wanted to use this information to investigate geographic trends between the author's affiliation and the 
location of the case-study (see suppl. material).

Did the study involve field work?
Yes
No

Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods

We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

Materials & experimental systems

n/a Involved in the study

Antibodies

Eukaryotic cell lines

Palaeontology and archaeology

Animals and other organisms

Human research participants

Clinical data

Dual use research of concern

Methods

n/a Involved in the study

ChIP-seq

Flow cytometry

MRI-based neuroimaging