npj | sustainable agriculture
Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Systems-oriented Innovation towards
Sustainable Smallholder Mixed Farming

Check for updates

Valentina Martínez-Ramón1
, Santiago López-Ridaura2,3, Alessandra Cossu1, Mazvita Chiduwa4,
Sabine Homann-Kee Tui5, Powell Mponela6, Nirman Shrestha7, Timothy J. Krupnik8,
Nurudeen Abdul Rahman9, Mateete Bekunda10, Kindu Mekonnen11, Randall S. Ritzema12,
Mary Atieno Otieno13, Tamiru Amanu Abetu14, Mattis Höft1, Kim van Wijngaarden1, Sanderijn Meijer1,
Daan Andreas1, Lois Veenings1, Margherita Senesi1, Yifan Wang1, Gerrie van de Ven14,
Katrien Descheemaeker14, Jerry Glover15, Sieglinde Snapp2 & Jeroen C. J. Groot1

Existing innovation approaches in smallholder mixed farming systems (MFS) often fall short by
overlooking system complexity and local contexts. This Perspective calls for more responsible and
effective co-design of MFS innovations. We outline distinct (socio-)technical innovation pathways, to
better comprehend their opportunities and trade-offs. Drawing on case studies from Sub-Saharan
Africa and South and South-East Asia, we identify three key enablers for MFS innovation approaches:
systems thinking, participatory processes, and context-sensitivity. Together, these elements can help
unlock the potential of MFS to improve livelihoods and advance landscape sustainability across the
Global South.

Mixed farming systems (MFS) are deﬁned by the presence of diverse
combinations of crops, livestock, trees, aquatic organisms and/or other
components that coexist within single farms and across rural communities.
They form the backbone of agricultural production in many low- and
middle-income countries (Fig. 1), contributing almost 70% of rural
households’ income1. Their signiﬁcance is particularly evident in Sub-
Saharan Africa (SSA) and South and South-East Asia (SA and SEA,
respectively), where they serve as a key source of livelihoods for millions of
smallholder farmers and rural communities, and provide a major share of
staple crop and livestock production1–3.
MFS are heterogeneous and characterized by different levels of com-
plexity in interactions among their different farm components, particularly
between the managed plants and animals. The core advantage of MFS liesin
their capacity to harness complementarities between farm components
through their integration, fostering system-level synergies that enhance
overall productivity and resource use efﬁciency4. The diversity inherent to
MFS not only supports multiple production objectives but also helps
building resilience to external environmental or economic shocks, and

promoting beneﬁcial ecological interactions3,5,6. Such synergies can lead to
improved soilhealth,nutrientcycling,andnaturalpestandweedregulation,
as evidenced in highly integrated mixed systems such as rice-duck-azolla-
ﬁsh polycultures7,8. Importantly, these beneﬁts are highly scale dependent,
shaped by temporal dynamics (e.g., multi-year rotations and successional
effects) and by spatial conﬁguration, as the connectivity of ﬁelds and natural
habitats in the landscape9. By producing a variety of outputs from limited
resources, MFS play a vital role in food and nutrition security, income
generation,
agricultural
risk
reduction,
and
in
sustainable
land
management1,10,11.
Despite the numerous beneﬁts and potentials of MFS, these systems
face mounting pressures. Biophysical pressures include climate change,
health issues in crops, livestock and other components, and progressive soil
degradation1. Furthermore, they are subjected to socioeconomic stressors
including increasingly limited and unequal access to resources such as land,
dysfunctional markets and market pressures towards specialization and
cash crop production, weak social protection systems, and farmers’
increasing
reliance
on
off-farm
livelihood
options;
often
poorly

1Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 2International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center,
Texcoco, Mexico. 3Innovation, Montpellier University, CIRAD, INRAE, Institut Agro, Montpellier, 34060, France. 4International Maize and Wheat Improvement
Center, Lilongwe, Malawi. 5International Center for Tropical Agriculture, Lilongwe, Malawi. 6International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, Patan, Nepal.

7International Water Management Institute, Patan, Nepal. 8International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 9International Institute of
Tropical Agriculture, Tamale, Ghana. 10International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Kampala, Uganda. 11International Livestock Research Institute, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia. 12Daugherty Water for Food Global Institute, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, USA. 13International Center for Tropical Agriculture,
Hanoi, Vietnam. 14Plant Production Systems, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 15International Rice Research Institute, Los
Baños, Philippines.
e-mail: valentinamartinezramon@gmail.com

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
1

1234567890():,;

1234567890():,;

compensated and subverting farmers’ own on-farm production12. More-
over, persistent gender disparities and implicit unequal access to assets,
credit, and decision-making power limit beneﬁts from improved practices
for women and youth13. The interplay of these factors undermines small-
holder capacity and compromises their ability to improve MFS to produce
sufﬁcient and adequate food and income, with equitable beneﬁts, as well as
reduces their ability to invest in other productive, sustainable, and resource-
efﬁcient practices14.
While many of the challenges within MFS are inﬂuenced by the
underlying regional and global economic pressures15, there is an
immediate need for local strategies that identify and sustain systemic
solutions, and thereby enhance their resilience, equitability and sus-
tainability. Agricultural innovation represents a promising pathway to
address these challenges. Innovation is understood here not merely as the
application of technological interventions, but more broadly as any type
of change that contributes towards enhancing social-ecological com-
munity goals, both in technical and socio-institutional dimensions16,17.
Innovations are widely extended by agricultural development programs,
yet in many instances have failed to fully achieve intended outcomes, and
have had limited impact, with modest or negligible adoption rates18. In
addition, innovations have often led to an ampliﬁcation of trade-offs and
inequalities, leading to e.g., reduced agency among women farmers, in
direct contradiction to sustainability objectives19.
Innovating in MFS has proved particularly challenging for various
reasons. To start with, the inherent complexity and interconnectedness of
these systems make it difﬁcult to identify effective entry points for inter-
ventions or to predict system-wide effects10. Additionally, an overall critique
of agricultural development within the MFS context is that a supply-driven

approach has too often prioritized technologies aimed at unlocking speciﬁc
biophysical challenges without considering the enabling socio-institutional
conditions16, where subsidy and market structures often incentivize farmers
to grow monocultures. Design shortcomings have further undermined the
effectiveness of innovation efforts. A focus on single farm components
within MFS-dominated landscapes has led to inadequate attention to the
interactions among multiple system components and their integration20.
The farmer and stakeholder community involvement are also too often not
considered from the start of the innovation process, which leads to tech-
nologies that are not ﬁne-tuned for local context, farmers’ diverse pre-
ferences and needs, and pay insufﬁcient attention to trade-offs among
sustainability objectives21,22. This has led to technology development that
inadequately addresses labour and cash constraints within MFS or fails to
mediate short versus long-term productivity and sustainability gains.
This Perspective advocates a more systems-oriented understanding
of MFS innovation, one that can guide researchers and practitioners in
navigating the unique opportunities MFS offer for delivering sustainable
outcomes in the Global South. We build on established agricultural
innovation frameworks as Agricultural Innovation Systems16 (AIS) and
the Multi-Level Perspective23 (MLP), acknowledging that innovation is
shaped by networks of actors and institutions, and that broader cross-
scale dynamics inﬂuence local change. Our contribution focuses on
integrating these perspectives with systems agronomy24,25 by making the
internal dynamics of farm systems explicit, offering a practical lens for
designing technical innovations in MFS. To do so, we ﬁrst outline MFS
innovation possibilities and disentangle their associated opportunities
and risks. We then illustrate these different innovation pathways through
case studies from Sub-Saharan Africa and South and South-East Asia,

Fig. 1 | Farming systems distribution in low- and middle-income countries, where different types of mixed farming systems are prevalent. Extracted from Dixon et al. (2023)69.

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
2

regions where MFS are central to rural livelihoods and landscape-level
sustainability. Building on these cases, we identify key enablers for
effective MFS innovation co-design, addressing concerns on how not to
contribute to ‘innovation speak’ as a reinforcer of compounding
dynamics that undermines and constrains the agency of local actors26.
This requires recognition of MFS interconnectedness by use of systems
approaches, ensuring innovation design is part of a participatory, co-
creation approach, and careful consideration of local contexts.

MFS innovation pathways
Innovation strategies for sustainable development in MFS need to address
the variability in the state and functions of heterogenous farming systems,
including biophysical conditions, household management and gender
relations, resource availability, and the inﬂuence of value networks and
policies. Innovation of these complex systems with the aim of improving
overall farm and farming system performance (social, productive, and
environmental) can take a variety of forms. We focus on technical inno-
vation at the farm system level, while recognizing that technical change
deeply impacts and is inﬂuenced by the socio-institutional dimension. We
thus treat the socio-institutional environment as an enabling layer which
shapeshow technical change is adoptedand scaled, rather than as a separate
innovation pathway.
Wedistinguishthreebroadtypesoftechnicalinnovationdependingon
the main focus of the strategy: enhancing component effectiveness, system
integration and system diversiﬁcation. Importantly, these are not inde-
pendent, and the implementation of one kind of innovation can simulta-
neously create opportunities for others. Furthermore, these technical

innovations can be coupled with socio-institutional ones, forming socio-
technical innovation bundles (STIBs) (Fig. 2).

Technical innovations
Technical innovations at the farm system level have the potential to sig-
niﬁcantly improve the performance of the system, positively impacting
productivity as well as environmental, social, human, and economic indi-
cators at the farm and community level. Broadly, technical innovation will
affect system dynamics and the magnitude of material ﬂows entering,
leaving, and moving within the system. Nonetheless, we can differentiate
technical innovations ranging from incremental to transformative
approaches interms of expected impact onperformance includingtargeting
componenteffectiveness,systemintegration,andsystemdiversiﬁcation.Itis
worth noting that although we here focus on farm level effects, these
innovations are inﬂuenced by drivers at the farming system and landscape
level, for example through collaboration between farms in the use and
organization of resources or labour, as well as by socio-institutional
environments.

Component effectiveness. Improving effectiveness refers to the opti-
mization of existing system components to increase productivity and
efﬁciency at farm or household level. This kind of management opti-
mization often involves farmers and their households making direct and
signiﬁcant changes to speciﬁc farm components to better utilizeresources
and/or reduce trade-offs, production costs, and losses. This could include
new water management strategies such as crop drip irrigation, improved
soil health and manure management practices that minimize nutrient

Fig. 2 | Pathways for sustainable innovation of smallholder mixed farming
systems (MFS). The innermost box represents the MFS where different components
interact resulting in socio-environmental outcomes. Enhancing component effec-
tiveness is exempliﬁed by use of higher yielding varieties, integration by the resource
ﬂows between components such as crops, ﬁshery and livestock, and diversiﬁcation
by the introduction of new components e.g., ﬁshery. The blue box represents the

enabling socio-institutional environment. Technical innovation can be bundled
with enabling socio-institutional innovations to form socio-technical innovation
bundles (STIBs). Critical enablers shown inyellow are the use of systems approaches,
ensuring innovation design is a participatory process, and careful consideration of
local contexts (Section 4).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
3

losses, or enhanced food preparation practices that improve nutrient
retention in foodproducts. Such innovations have tobe understood inthe
context of a highly interconnected MFS, where optimization of one
component may lead to trade-offs at system level. An example is seen in
conventional rice breeding, where decades of selection for higher yield
have been linked to declines in key micronutrients such as iron and zinc,
with negative implications for household nutrition in rice-dependent
smallholder systems27. Recognizing these cascading effects is essential to
designing innovations that are effective not just at the component level,
but also at the system level.

System integration. Targeting system integration through innovation
entails purposefully strengthening linkages between system components,
hence enhancing synergies between the existing components to improve
overall system performance. For example, this can involve the redirection
of ﬂows between existing components, such as by changing the allocation
of a speciﬁc farm byproduct. This type of innovation is particularly
effective in restoring broken or weakened connections that otherwise
disrupt the system’s cyclical nature and lead to unnecessary environ-
mental losses. For example, if manure is not returned to the soil, nutrients
are lost, soil quality may decline, and the potential complementarity
between the crop and livestock components is diminished. Innovations
that restore and strengthen these connections, such as utilizing crop
residue as animal feed, can enhance nutrient cycling and resource use
efﬁciency, producing noticeable improvements in farm performance1,5.
Nonetheless, this may also introduce new trade-offs at system level: those
same residues could otherwise serve as mulch for soil coverage and
moisture conservation. Addressing such trade-offs in systems analysis of
innovations is essential to avoid undermining MFS sustainability.

System diversiﬁcation. Diversifying farming systems involves the
addition of new components, thereby increasing the system’s diversity
and complexity, particularly when new links are created between existing
and new components, creating novel opportunities for integration. Some
examples include introducing new crops or forages into the crop rotation,
or adding trees, ﬁsheries, compost, or biogas structures. The introduction
of new components can reduce the risk of total failure at the farm level in
the event that the performance of one component is decimated by speciﬁc
biophysical or market stresses. For instance, introduction of soybean to a
maize farm can mitigate the impact of fall armyworm on maize. Addi-
tionally, diversiﬁcation creates opportunities for alternative markets if
the maize or other critical markets are underperforming, and provides
nutritional beneﬁts to complement the maize household and community

diet. By increasing the diversity of farm system components and their
integration, new components provide additional resources or outputs
which can potentially contribute to multiple farm dimensions – diver-
sifying outputs and enhancing overall circularity and resilience28. How-
ever, diversiﬁcation may also introduce new risks or trade-offs for
farmers, such as increased labour demands or greater management
complexity.

Socio-technical innovation bundles. The success of the technical
innovations in bringing about the intended change depends on the socio-
institutional environment in which the smallholders operate13. While
technical innovations hold potential to enhance both social and ecolo-
gical dimensions and farm productivity, their adoption and scaling
depend on a complex web of social and institutional factors. These
include policy frameworks, organizational arrangements, governance
structures, market dynamics, value networks, knowledge systems, cul-
tural norms, gender relations, and economic and political power interests
and imbalances, all of which can either accelerate or hinder the uptake
and effectiveness of innovations. In many smallholder contexts, the
institutional dimension can become a trap for farmers, hindering sus-
tainable agricultural development29. For instance, smallholders often face
binding structural constraints such as insecure land tenure or limited
landholdings30. These conditions restrict their ability to reorganize
resource ﬂows, even when technical options are known. Thus, socio-
institutional change is often fundamental for successful innovation16.
Furthermore, while being part of similar institutional contexts, farming
communities can be heterogeneous in social structures, with differing
values, perspectives, preferences, culture, gender, and power dynamics,
and in their access to economic opportunities regarding innovation31. In
this light, socio-technical innovation bundles (STIBs), entailing the
combination of technical innovations with related socio-institutional
ones, can drive impactful implementation and scaling, and address trade-
offs and unwanted effects that could emerge from the innovation
processes32,33. Examples include subsidy programs that enhance small-
holders’ capability to adopt small-scale irrigation (component effec-
tiveness) and micro-ﬁnance services that enable the integration of new
system components, such as ﬁsheries or multipurpose legumes into the
smallholder system34 (Table 1).

Learning from ex-ante assessment of MFS innovation
Hereweusefourinnovationstudiesfromourresearchcarriedoutwithinthe
4-year CGIAR Research Initiative on Mixed Farming Systems (MFS), in
countries with representative smallholder MFS, to exemplify each

Table 1 | Examples of MFS innovation pathways. The list is not exhaustive but is meant to illustrate possibilities for MFS
innovation

Entry point
Innovation type
Innovation strategy
Examples

Technical
Component
effectiveness
Optimizing the irrigation system
Increased irrigation levels based on crop-speciﬁc requirements60 (Section 3.1)

Optimizing plant density
Changing plant density to improve yields61

Adjusting fertilizer application
Improved fertilizer source, application placement and timing62

System integration
Improving feed quality
Improved animal diets through new crop rotations33 (Section 3.2)

Increasing feed availability
Utilizing perennial fodder crops as livestock feed63

Improving manure application
Adjusting the source, timing and application methods of manure to the soil64

System diversiﬁcation
Adding trees in the system
Implementation of silvo-pastoral systems65 (Section 3.3)

Adding multipurpose crops
Introduction of crops with multipurpose traits suited to mixed maize systems on
limited landholdings for feed, soil fertility and food22

Adding aquaculture
Introduction of aquaculture to terrestrial production systems66

Socio-technical
bundles
Flexible markets and ﬁnance services
for legume diversiﬁcation
Leveraging stakeholder collaborations to co-design service and innovation
bundles to incentivize the integration of legumes for system diversiﬁcation67

(Section 3.4)

Gender inclusive advisory services for
legume diversiﬁcation
Re-orienting the legume diversiﬁcation extension system from household head
(often male) centric to more targeted, gender inclusive approach68

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
4

innovation pathway for MFS. In general, we applied a range of ex-ante
assessment methods, from quantitative whole-farm modelling using the
FarmDESIGN model35,36 and measuring economic, social and environ-
mental farm indicators, to qualitative methods such as surveys or Focus
Group Discussions (FGDs) that explore farmers’ perceptions on innova-
tions. The use of ex-ante analyses of system level effects in each innovation
case highlights the diverse ways in which the innovation types in the fra-
mework can interact with the complexities of MFS. While we focus on the
main lessons learnt from the studies in this section, the Supplementary
Informationprovidesfurthercontextonthecasestudies,methodsused,and
results of the explorations.

Component effectiveness in Nepal – optimizing irrigation use
Water scarcity and climate-induced droughts have emerged as major
challenges in the mid-hills of Nepal. Additionally, current production levels
are unable to meet food security objectives for the population. In this
context, the potential of improving irrigation use to achieve higher yields
with minimal waterinputs was explored fora representative average farm in
the Surkhet district in western Nepal. The 0.5 ha farmland produced staple
crops such as rice, wheat and maize in a double rotation that also sometimes
included lentils or potatoes. Livestock included chickens, goats, and at least
one cow or buffalo. The analysis revealed the potential of increasing irri-
gationlevelsbased oncrop-speciﬁcwaterrequirements,whichcould double
the yield of crops grown outside the monsoon season, like maize and potato.
The increase in yields and the use of crop residues were expected to support
an increase in livestock numbers and enhance soil fertility (up to 30%
potential increase in SOM). However, it was noted that improved irrigation
alone could not be a ‘silver bullet’ that mitigates agricultural under-
performance, as yield gaps were also attributed to nutrient deﬁciencies and
weed competition. Hence, multiple innovations that would not solely focus
on effectiveness (in this case irrigation), but advance more integrated
solutions (e.g., as improving soil fertility by adding nitrogen-ﬁxing crops to
the rotation) would be required for conserving water resources, supporting
long-term agricultural productivity, and minimizing environmental
impacts.

System integration in Ghana – Improving livestock diets
Smallruminantsare valuableelementsinsustainablefarmingsystems.They
can convert plant residues from the farm by-products into human food,
adding economic value to otherwise lower-value crops, and providing
important pathways out of food insecurity and extreme poverty on small
farmland holdings37,38. Alternative livestock rations based on crop residues
for small ruminants were explored with the aim of improving farming
system performance in the Kumbungu and Savelugu districts in Northern
Ghana.Thesmallruminantfarmshadanaveragesizeofaround2 halandof
which about half was cultivated with maize and the rest was occupied by
groundnut, soybean, and rice. Some farmers in the area produced a greater
diversity of crops, including cassava, yam, pearl millet, and/or pepper. We
found that the cultivation of a greater diversity of crops and a more nutri-
tious diet for the animals could support a greater small ruminant ﬂock size,
increasing the numbers from 10 to up to 26 animals. This was expected to
enhance crop and livestock productivity, without needing more land or
external feed. In turn, soil fertility was expected to improve due to the
increased manure application from the ﬂock, as well as the inclusion of new
leguminous crops that ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen, replacing maize. Pigeon
pea and cowpea, in particular, had high positive potential impacts when
used as small ruminant feed, due to their large and nutritious residue pro-
duction (up to 1,1and 1,8 Mg/ha,respectively).However,farmersexpressed
reluctance toward cropping innovations due to insecure land tenure and
growing concerns about land grabbing, which undermines their willingness
toinvestinlandtheymightsuddenlylose39.Thispointsatthewiderneedfor
public institutions that guarantee law enforcement and property rights,
while also recognizing the role of customary tenure systems, which may
provide de facto security where they are legitimate40,41. Strengthening both
statutory and customary institutions is critical to ensuring fair and

transparent governance of land transactions, thereby enabling farmers to
adopt farm innovations and realize their full beneﬁts40,42.

System diversiﬁcation in Laos – Implementing a silvo-
pastoral system
Silvo-pastoral systems offer pathways to improve farmer economies and
reverse environmental degradation in MFS in Xieng Khouang province in
the northeast of Laos. The farms in the focal region are typically 5–10 ha,
consisting of pastures, cultivated plots of paddy rice, maize and/or other
crops, and small vegetable gardens for household consumption. Addition-
ally, they produced cattle, buffalo, pigs, chickens, and/or ducks. The use of
farm modelling to assess the impacts of converting the average farm system
to silvo-pastoral systems that integrate trees, forage crops and livestock,
indicated that the introduction of trees could support manifold beneﬁts,
such as providing fodder to animals, increasing soil fertility (up to 20%
increase in SOM content), increasing farm proﬁts, and saving labour. Tree
incorporation, however, would require additional labour, investment and
management knowledge to generate returns on the investments, presenting
signiﬁcant barriers to adoption. While farmers in the study felt positive
abouttheimpactsexpectedfromconvertingtoasilvo-pastoralsystem,some
were concerned about the implementation challenges.
Systemic innovations targeting system integration or diversiﬁcation, as
the implementation of agroforestry systems in this case, that promise broad
and long-termbeneﬁts,oftencomewithhigh barrierstoadoption,requiring
substantial investment in time, labour, and knowledge. This contrasts with
innovations that target component effectiveness, which are generally easier
to implement but have less potential impacts on overall system perfor-
mance.Tosurpass such challenges, these innovationtypes require sustained
support through farmer accompaniment in on-farm experimentation,
capacity building, and risk aversion mechanisms during transition periods.

Socio-technical innovation bundles in Malawi – Socio-
institutional bundling for legume diversiﬁcation
Legume diversiﬁcation in maize-dominated, low-input farming systems in
Malawi can enhance productivity and provide a variety of ecological and
socio-economic beneﬁts. However, the socio-technical bundles required to
successfully realize the beneﬁts of legume diversiﬁcation are still unclear.
This study thus explored which social and institutional innovations to
bundle with legume diversiﬁcation through a conjoint experiment43. The
experiment involved farmer participation in trials for Mbili-Mbili strip
cropping, a maize and legume intercropping technique44. The qualitative
assessment, based on hypothetical STIBs that were generated and assessed
by participating farmers, highlighted the need for institutional innovations
to better enable legume diversiﬁcation in smallholder systems in Malawi.
This would enable adequate beneﬁts for women farmers in particular, who
tend to have strong preferences for legumes, given their multiple uses and
nutrition beneﬁts45,46. The main preferred institutional innovations identi-
ﬁed by farmers for bundling included microloan services that could be
repaid after harvest, combining the supply of soybean and pigeon seeds with
maizeseeds,and crop insuranceservices,aswellasmarketservicesthatoffer
farmers more ﬂexibility. While the ﬁndings underscore the importance of
offering institutional services to farmers along with technical innovations in
the form of STIBs, we found that farmers were heterogeneous in their
preferences for the different socio-institutional innovations, with some
favouring credit access, others prioritizing seed bundles, and others valuing
insurance over the rest. The variation in farmer preference is an essential
consideration in STIB design to reﬂect diverse needs, constraints, and
priorities within farming communities. It also relates to farmer preferences
not only being shaped by their household needs but also by political
economy factors, including control over resources, market and institutional
functioning in providing access to ﬁnance, seeds, and insurance.

Critical enablers for sustainable innovation co-design for MFS
Building on our experience aimed at advancing sustainable innovation in
MFS, we have identiﬁed three key enablers – systems approaches,

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
5

participatory processes, and context sensitivity – which emergedas essential
to effective and equitable innovation co-design in MFS.

Systems approaches – considering interconnectedness. Systems
approaches view farming systems not as isolated entities, but as
embedded within complex ecological, social, and economic systems,
where diverse elements interact to generate outcomes47,48. Innovations,
regardless of their domain, can reverberate across multiple dimensions of
the farming system, inﬂuencing both socio-institutional and technical
realms, and extending their impact to the broader landscape, as high-
lighted by our case studies. Recognizing these multi-layered inter-
dependencies is essential for the effective design of innovations in MFS49.
To address this complexity and understand potential effects and trade-
offs, enhanced innovation anticipation methods can be helpful, where
attention is paid to meaningful engagement with stakeholders through-
out the process17,21. The use of integrated assessments within our research,
including whole farm modelling, offered a comprehensive evaluation of
innovation impacts by quantifying externalities across social, environ-
mental, and economic indicators at both the farm and landscape scales3.
Systems assessments are strengthened through building on local
knowledge and involvement of farmers, including using a gender-aware
approach22. Additionally, while acknowledging the difﬁculty of qualita-
tively anticipating innovation effects, quantitative assessments should be
complemented, as much as possible, by robust anticipation evaluation
that considers wider possible effects on communities, such as impacts on
food sovereignty, or indigenous knowledge17.

Participatory processes. A key implication of applying systems
approaches to MFS development is placing individual farmers and entire
communities at the core of innovation design (i.e., their autonomous
design50) through collaborative, participatory processes. This focus is
central to reframing smallholder MFS innovation in ways that enable
innovation design to effectively improve overall sustainability. While the
use of participatory approaches in agricultural research and development
is surely increasing, implementation varies in scope and depth. For
instance, while Sarku et al.51. ﬁnd an increasing tendency towards par-
ticipatory agricultural modelling studies, stakeholder engagement fre-
quently remains narrow in the studies. In general, there is a need for a
more critical reﬂection on the purpose and value of participation to move
beyond tokenism, as participation otherwise risks amplifying and rein-
forcing present power structures, privileging techno-scientiﬁc knowledge
and perspectives over local ones52.
Participation within the MFS initiative aimed to support co-learning
processes, including site-level farmers co-determining the innovation to be
studied through integrated assessments, as the ones presented in this paper.
Our work complements approaches that go beyond design to imple-
mentation phases, through iterative co-learning cycles such as those in
participatory action research (PAR). In Malawi, for instance, PAR has
provedsuccessfulinsupportingthedevelopmentofuniquesustainableMFS
innovations,whichrequiredsustainedengagementoverdecades,respectfor
local knowledge and attention to building capacity and communication
throughout the process arise22. Although this level of engagement may not
be feasible for all research processes, it is recommended for grappling with
the highly complex challenges of sustainable development, where value-
conﬂicts and power inequities arise.

Context-sensitivity. Finally, considering smallholder MFS as part of
wider complex socio-ecological systems also necessitates the recognition
and thorough analysis of the heterogeneous agroecological, socio-
economic, and historical contexts in which they operate. The varying
conditions and dynamics mandate the development of place-based and
context-speciﬁc innovations that are locally adapted and shaped, while
also acknowledging market functioning, institutional arrangements, and
power relations that inﬂuence who participates in and beneﬁts from
innovations53,54.

Vinsel & Russell55 refer to ‘innovation speak’ as the extended discourse
surrounding innovation that assumes that innovations are inherently
beneﬁcial instruments (understood mostly as technologies) capable of
achieving sustainable development and solving major world challenges,
such as food insecurity, poverty or climate change. A disregard of local
actors’ needs and perspectives as well as connectedness to social networks
withrespect totheirowndevelopmentfrequentlyaccompaniesthisoutlook.
In practice, this can result in a lack of adoption and ineffectiveness of the
innovations advanced by research and development projects, and, fur-
thermore, reinforce power imbalances, create technological lock-ins for
communities, and/or displace traditional and indigenous knowledge26,56.
Moreover, the dominant innovation paradigm often reduces the
structural roots of underdevelopment to a deﬁcit in innovation capacity.
This framing overlooks that such conditions emerge from complex and
interlocking structural barriers, including volatile and unfavourable mar-
kets, liquidity and credit constraints, insecure and unequal land rights,
under-resourced extension and data systems, structural gender and socio-
economic inequalities, and political-economic power imbalances. These
constraintsarebothrootedinandreproducedbyinstitutionalarrangements
andcoloniallegaciesthatshapeaccesstoassets,information,andbargaining
power26,42,57. Recognizing this, innovation design must pay special attention
to the structural and historical context in which it takes place, as well as
systemic preconditions that would enable their uptake, such as macro-
economic stability, fair and competitive markets, tenure security, and
accessible information systems58. If innovation aims to solve major chal-
lenges, such as smallholder poverty or food insecurity, then any innovation
that does not acknowledge root structural causes of these issues will fail to
advance real transformation and may exacerbate prevailing inequities26,33,56.
Technical innovations aimed at mitigating land degradation and food
insecurity often fall short when they overlook broader structural pressures
such as those from land acquisition and consolidation processes, which can
constrain farmers’ capacity to adapt. This challenge is evident in our Gha-
nian case study (Section 3.2), where the potential beneﬁts of cropping sys-
tems innovations were undermined by farmers’ unwillingness to invest in
land theydidnotownorcould loseat shortnotice.Additionally,land tenure
granting and irrigation innovation schemes speciﬁcally often leave women
and youth out, and consequently reduce their control of resources and
contribute to gendered disenfranchisement56,59. Without addressing these
underlying inequalities, innovations are likely to be short-sighted and lim-
ited in their transformative impact.

Conclusions
Agricultural innovation holds signiﬁcant promise to improve the sustain-
ability of smallholder MFS, but realizing this potential requires moving
beyond reductionist, technocentric and top-down approaches. This Per-
spective contributes to rethinking MFS innovation by answering both the
what and the how for designing MFS innovations. It sharpens under-
standing of possible strategies and their system-level effects, and points to
three critical enablers of responsible innovation: careful consideration of
heterogeneous socio-ecological contexts and interests represented among
farmers and communities, inclusive co-design with engaged farmers and
communities, and recognition of MFS interconnectedness within politically
and socially contested environments.
The challenge is profound: deep structural barriers including limited
labour and capital, insecure and fragmented landholdings, and entrenched
power inequalities, continue to affect smallholders. Systems-oriented
innovation processes can help navigate such constraints to arrive at
locally adapted innovations for system re-design. Equally important is
rethinking scaling, shifting the focus from replicating individual solutions
towards expanding innovation processes that allow communities to
generate, test and reﬁne their own futures. Advancing such trans-
formative and reﬂexive innovation approaches can open pathways to
secure sustainable futures for MFS, strengthening rural communities’
agency and resilience while safeguarding the natural resource base on
which they depend.

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
6

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Received: 30 July 2025; Accepted: 2 December 2025;

References
1.
Baker, E. et al. Mixed farming systems: potentials and barriers for
climate change adaptation in food systems. Curr. Opin. Environ.
Sustain. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COSUST.2023.101270 (2023).
2.
Herrero, M. et al. Farming and the geography of nutrientproductionfor
human use: a transdisciplinary analysis. Lancet Planet Health https://
doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30007-4 (2017).
3.
Parsons, D. et al. Development and evaluation of an integrated
simulationmodelfor assessingsmallholder crop-livestock production
in Yucatán, Mexico. Agric Syst. 104, 1–12 (2011).
4.
Sumberg, J. Toward a dis-aggregated view of crop–livestock
integration in Western Africa. Land Use Policy https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0264-8377(03)00021-8 (2003).
5.
Ruﬁno, M. C., Hengsdijk, H. & Verhagen, A. Analysing integration and
diversity in agro-ecosystems by using indicators of network analysis.
Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosyst 84, 229–247 (2009).
6.
Stark, F. et al. Crop-livestock integration determines the
agroecological performance of mixed farming systems in Latino-
Caribbean farms. Agron. Sustain Dev. 38, 1–11 (2018).
7.
Khumairoh, U., Lantinga, E. A., Handriyadi, I., Schulte, R. P. O. &
Groot, J. C. J. Agro-ecological mechanisms for weed and pest
suppression and nutrient recycling in high yielding complex rice
systems. Agric Ecosyst. Environ. 313, 107385 (2021).
8.
Xie,J.et al.Ecologicalmechanismsunderlyingthesustainability ofthe
agricultural heritage rice-ﬁsh coculture system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 108, E1381–E1387 (2011).
9.
Morizet-Davis, J. et al. Ecosystem Services at the Farm Level—
Overview, Synergies, Trade-Offs, and Stakeholder Analysis. Glob.
Chall. 7, 2200225 (2023).
10. González-García, E., Gourdine, J. L., Alexandre, G., Archimède, H. &
Vaarst, M. The complex nature of mixed farming systems requires
multidimensional actions supported by integrative research and
development efforts. Animal 6, 763–777 (2012).
11. Herrero, M. et al. Smart investments in sustainable food production:
Revisiting mixed crop-livestock systems. Science (1979) 327,
822–825 (2010).
12. Gomez y Paloma, S., Riesgo, L. & Louhichi, K. The Role of Smallholder
Farms in Food and Nutrition Security. The Role of Smallholder Farms
in Food and Nutrition Security (Springer International Publishing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-42148-9/COVER (2020).
13. Snyder, K. A. & Sulle, E. The Impact and Outcomes of Sustainable
Intensiﬁcation Initiatives in Six Countries on Women, Men, and Other
Social Groups. https://hdl.handle.net/10568/126943 (2022).
14. Touch, V. et al. Smallholder farmers’ challenges and opportunities:
Implications for agricultural production, environment and food
security. J. Environ. Manag. 370, 122536 (2024).
15. McGreevy, S. R. et al. Sustainable agrifood systems for a post-growth
world. Nat. Sustain. 5, 1011–1017 (2022). 5.
16. Klerkx, L., Van Mierlo, B. & Leeuwis, C. Evolution of systems
approaches to agricultural innovation: Concepts, analysis and
interventions. in Farming Systems Research into the 21st Century:The
New Dynamic 457–483 (Springer Netherlands, 2012). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-94-007-4503-2_20/TABLES/3.
17. Ludwig, D. & Macnaghten, P. Traditional ecological knowledge in
innovation governance: a framework for responsible and just
innovation. J. Responsible Innov. 7, 26–44 (2020).
18. Nhantumbo, N. S., Zivale, C. O., Nhantumbo, I. S. & Gomes, A. M.
Making agricultural intervention attractive to farmers in Africa through
inclusive innovation systems. World Dev. Perspect. 4, 19–23 (2016).

19. Rietveld, A. M., Groot, J. C. J. & van der Burg, M. Predictable patterns
of unsustainable intensiﬁcation. Int J. Agric Sustain 20, 461–477
(2022).
20. Mabhaudhi, T., Chibarabada, T. P. & Sikka, A. Status of integrated
crop-livestock research in the mixed farming systems of the Global
South: a scoping study. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fsufs.2023.1241675 (2023).
21. Breure, T. S. et al. A systematic review of the methodology of trade-off
analysis in agriculture. Nat. Food 2024 5(3 5), 211–220 (2024).
22. Snapp, S. S. et al. Participatory action research generates knowledge
for Sustainable Development Goals. Front Ecol. Environ. 21, 341–349
(2023).
23. Geels, F. W. Technological transitions as evolutionary reconﬁguration
processes: a multi-level perspective and a case-study. Res Policy 31,
1257–1274 (2002).
24. Giller, K. E. et al. Communicating complexity: Integrated assessment
of trade-offs concerning soil fertility management within African
farming systems to support innovation and development. Agric Syst.
104, 191–203 (2011).
25. Reckling, M., Bergkvist, G., Watson, C. A., Stoddard, F. L. &
Bachinger, J. Re-designing organic grain legume cropping systems
using systems agronomy. Eur. J. Agron. 112, 125951 (2020).
26. Jiménez, A., Pansera, M. & Abdelnour, S. Imposing innovation: How
‘innovation speak’ maintains postcolonial exclusion in Peru. World
Dev. 189, 106914 (2025).
27. Tiozon, R. J. N. et al. Unlocking the potential of wild rice to bring
missing nutrition to elite grains. Plant Commun. 6, 101344 (2025).
28. Asante, B. O., Villano, R. A., Patrick, I. W. & Battese, G. E.
Determinants of farm diversiﬁcation in integrated crop–livestock
farming systems in Ghana. Renew. Agriculture Food Syst. 33,
131–149 (2018).
29. Struik, P. C., Klerkx, L., Van Huis, A. & Röling, N. G. Institutional
change towards sustainable agriculture in West Africa. Int J. Agric
Sustain 12, 203–213 (2014).
30. Chiarella, C., Meyfroidt, P., Abeygunawardane, D. & Conforti, P.
Balancing the trade-offs between land productivity, labor productivity
and labor intensity. Ambio 52, 1618 (2023).
31. Krampe, C., Ingenbleek, P. T. M., Niemi, J. K. & Serratosa, J.
Designing precision livestock farming system innovations: A farmer
perspective. J. Rural Stud. 111, 103397 (2024).
32. Gebreyes, M., Notenbaert, A. M. O., López Ridaura, S., Kizito, F. &
Wery, J. Co-Designing Socio-Technical Innovation Bundles for the
Sustainable Intensiﬁcation of Mixed Farming Systems: A
Methodological Note. https://hdl.handle.net/10568/128746 (2023).
33. Barrett, C. B. The political economy of bundling socio-technical
innovations to transform agri-food systems. in The Political Economy
of Food System Transformation: Pathways to Progress in a Polarized
World 206–229 (Oxford University Press, https://doi.org/10.1093/
OSO/9780198882121.003.0009 (2023).
34. Barrett, C. B. et al. Bundling innovations to transform agri-food
systems. Nat. Sustain. 3(12 3), 974–976 (2020).
35. Groot, J. C. J., Oomen, G. J. M. & Rossing, W. A. H. Multi-objective
optimization and design of farming systems. Agric Syst. 110, 63–77
(2012).
36. Ditzler, L. et al. A model to examine farm household trade-offs and
synergies with an application to smallholders in Vietnam. Agric Syst.
173, 49–63 (2019).
37. Lawal-Adebowale,O.A.DynamicsofRuminantLivestock Management
in the Context of the Nigerian Agricultural System. in Livestock
Production (IntechOpen, https://doi.org/10.5772/52923 (2012).
38. Herrero, M. et al. The roles of livestock in developing countries. Animal
7, 3–18 (2013).
39. Alhassan, S. I., Shaibu, M. T., Kuwornu, J. K. M., Damba, O. T. &
Amikuzuno, J. The nexus of land grabbing and livelihood of farming
households in Ghana. Environ. Dev. Sustain 23, 3289–3317 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
7

40. Lawry, S. et al. The impact of land property rights interventions on
investment and agricultural productivity in developing countries: a
systematic review. J. Dev. Eff. 9, 61–81 (2017).
41. Belton, B., Win, M. T., Zhang, X. & Filipski, M. The rapid rise of
agricultural mechanization in Myanmar. Food Policy 101, 102095
(2021).
42. Holden, S. T. & Otsuka, K. The roles of land tenure reforms and land
markets in the context of population growth and land use
intensiﬁcation in Africa. Food Policy 48, 88–97 (2014).
43. Rao, V. R. Conjoint Analysis. Wiley International Encyclopedia of
Marketing https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444316568.WIEM02019
(2010).
44. Kihara, J. M. & Kinyua, M. W. Mbili-Mbili technology: Increasing
legume production in East Africa. https://hdl.handle.net/10568/
125404 (2022).
45. Homann-Kee Tui, S., Snyder, K. A., Chiduwa, M. & Liben, F. Insights
for Enhancing Gender Equity and Social Inclusion through Sustainable
Intensiﬁcation of Mixed Farming Systems of Malawi. https://hdl.
handle.net/10568/159441 (2024).
46. Snapp, S. S. et al. Maize yield and proﬁtability tradeoffs with social,
human and environmental performance: Is sustainable intensiﬁcation
feasible?. Agric Syst. 162, 77–88 (2018).
47. Clayton,A. M. H. & Radcliffe, N. J. Sustainability: A systemsapproach.
Sustainability: A Syst. Approach 1, 257 (2018).
48. Van Berkum, S., Dengerink, J. & Ruben, R. The Food Systems
Approach: Sustainable Solutions for a Sufﬁcient Supply of Healthy
Food. (2018).
49. Ostrom, E., Janssen, M. A. & Anderies, J. M. Going beyond panaceas.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104, 15176–15178 (2007).
50. Escobar, A. Designs for the Pluriverse. Radical Interdependence,
Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds. Scientiﬁc American vol. 57
(2018).
51. Sarku, R., Whitﬁeld, S., Jennings, S. & Challinor, A. J. Approaches to
participation and knowledge equity in agricultural climate impacts
modelling: a systematic literature review. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 23,
1–21 (2025).
52. Pansera, M. & Owen, R. Framing inclusive innovation within the
discourse of development: Insights from case studies in India. Res
Policy 47, 23–34 (2018).
53. Reich, J., Paul, S. S. & Snapp, S. S. Highly variable performance of
sustainable intensiﬁcation on smallholder farms: A systematic review.
Glob. Food Sec 30, 100553 (2021).
54. Hartley, S., McLeod, C., Clifford, M., Jewitt, S. & Ray, C. A
retrospective analysis of responsible innovation for low-technology
innovation in the Global South. J. Responsible Innov. 6, 143–162
(2019).
55. Vinsel, L. & Russell, A. The Innovation Delusion. (Penguin Random
House, (2020).
56. Bezner Kerr, R. Feminist Agroecology Viewed through the Lens of the
Plantationocene. Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr. 114, 2204–2211 (2024).
57. Harding, S. The Postcolonial Science and Technology Studies
Reader. (Duke University Press, (2011).
58. Burke, W. J., Snapp, S. S., Peter, B. G. & Jayne, T. S. Sustainable
intensiﬁcation in jeopardy: Transdisciplinary evidence from Malawi.
Sci. Total Environ. 837, 155758 (2022).
59. Hailemariam, A., Kalsi, J. & Mavisakalyan, A. Gender gaps in the
adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices: Evidence from sub-
Saharan Africa. J. Agric Econ. 75, 764–793 (2024).
60. Veenings, L. et al. Identifying opportunities for sustainable
intensiﬁcation of mixed farming systems in the Mid-Hills of Nepal by
optimal use of water in agriculture. (CGIAR, 2023).
61. Han, K., Liu, B., Liu, P. & Wang, Z. The optimal plant density of maize
for dairy cow forage production. Agron. J. 112, 1849–1861 (2020).

62. Berdjour, A. et al. Impact of fertilizer applications on grain and
vegetable crops in smallholder Mixed Crop-Livestock (MCL) systems
in West Africa. Eur. J. Agron. 164, 127525 (2025).
63. Höft, M. Hedging eroding slopes in Malawi: Can the integration of
contour bunds and perennial forages improve Malawian mixed
farming system productivity. (2024).
64. Bationo, A. et al. Sustainable intensiﬁcation of crop– livestock
systems through manure management in eastern and western Africa:
Lessons learned and emerging research opportunities. in Sustainable
crop–livestock production for improved livelihoods and natural
resource management in West Africa, Proceedings of an International
Conference (Ibadan, Nigeria, (2001).
65. VanWijngaarden,K.et al.Silvopasture forimprovedsmallholder crop-
livestock systems: A case study of sustainable intensiﬁcation in the
Xieng Khouang province, Lao PDR. (2023).
66. Ignowski, L., Belton, B., Ali, H. & Thilsted, S. H. Integrated aquatic and
terrestrial food production enhances micronutrient and economic
productivity for nutrition-sensitive food systems. Nat. Food 4,
866–873 (2023).
67. Abetu, T. A. et al. Co-design of socio-technical innovation bundles:
lessons for sustainable intensiﬁcation of smallholder farming systems
in Malawi. in 8th International Farming System Design Conference
(2025).
68. Yatogo, H. Assessment of Maize-Legume Intercropping as a Way for
Sustainable Intensiﬁcation in Mixed Farming Systems for Smallholder
Farmers in Jimma, Ethiopia https://hdl.handle.net/10568/170271
(2024).
69. Dixon, J., Li, L. & Amede, T. A century of farming systems. Part 1:
Concepts and evolution. Farming Syst. 1, 100055 (2023).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the CGIAR Mixed Farming Systems
(MFS) Initiative (https://www.cgiar.org/initiative/mixed-farming-systems/),
now integrated into the CGIAR Sustainable Farming Science Program.
CGIAR research is supported by contributions to the CGIAR Trust Fund.
CGIAR is a global research partnership for a food-secure future dedicated to
transforming food, land, and water systems in a climate crisis.

Author contributions
V.M.R. & A.C.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing.
S.L.R.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Resources,
Supervision, Project Administration, Funding Acquisition. M.C., S.H-K.T.,
P.M., N.S., T.J.K., A.R.N., K.M., M.A.O., G.V., K.D.: Writing, Supervision.
M.B., J.G.: Writing, Project Administration, Funding Acquisition. T.A.A.,
M.H., K.W., S.M., D.A., L.V., M.S., Y.W.: Investigation, Writing. R.S.R., S.S.:
Writing. J.C.J.G: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing, Supervision.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Valentina Martínez-Ramón.

Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
8

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
isnot includedin thearticle’s CreativeCommons licenceandyour intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2025

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44264-025-00114-9
Perspective

npj Sustainable Agriculture |  (2026) 4:5 
9